The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Orbis Pictus, by John Amos Comenius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Orbis Pictus

Author: John Amos Comenius

Editor: Charles William Bardeen

Translator: Charles Hoole

Release Date: March 9, 2009 [EBook #28299]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORBIS PICTUS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






[Transcriber’s Note:

This e-text includes characters that require UTF-8 (Unicode) file
encoding:

  œ  [oe ligature, used in all Latin text]
  ☉ ♂ ♈ ... [astrological symbols: see below]

If any of these characters do not display properly, or if the
apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage,
make sure your text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set
to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font.

The two sections numbered CIV use astrological symbols. Most are
accompanied by a definition, so the meaning will be plain even if your
text reader cannot display them. When a symbol is used in place of a
word, an alternative text is shown after the affected paragraph.

In the _Orbis Pictus_ text, apparent errors in punctuation and
typography (such as Italic type where Roman is expected) were unchanged
except in chapter headers. Other errors, whether corrected or not, are
listed at the end of the e-text. Note that “Dutch” generally means
“German”.

The original text was printed in parallel columns with English on the
left. For this e-text the English and the Latin are shown in small
blocks with differing indentation. Line breaks are approximately but
not exactly the same as in the original.]




The

ORBIS PICTUS

of

JOHN AMOS COMENIUS.


  This work is, indeed, the first children’s picture book.
    --ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, 9TH EDITION, vi. 182.


  [Publisher’s Device:
  School Bulletin Publications 1874]

  SYRACUSE, N.Y.:
  C. W. BARDEEN, PUBLISHER,
  1887.

  Copyright, 1887, by C. W. BARDEEN.




It may not be generally known that Comenius was once solicited to become
President of Harvard College. The following is a quotation from Vol. II,
p. 14, of Cotton Mather’s MAGNALIA:

  “That brave old man, Johannes Amos Commenius, the fame of whose
  worth has been TRUMPETTED as far as more than three languages
  (whereof everyone is indebted unto his JANUA) could carry it, was
  indeed agreed withal, by one Mr. Winthrop in his travels through
  the LOW COUNTRIES, to come over to New England, and illuminate
  their Colledge and COUNTRY, in the quality of a President, which
  was now become vacant. But the solicitations of the Swedish
  Ambassador diverting him another way, that incomparable Moravian
  became not an American.”

This was on the resignation of President Dunster, in 1654--Note of Prof.
PAYNE, Compayre’s History of Education, Boston, 1886, p. 125.




EDITOR’S PREFACE.


When it is remembered that this work is not only an educational classic
of prime importance, but that it was the first picture-book ever made
for children and was for a century the most popular text-book in Europe,
and yet has been for many years unattainable on account of its rarity,
the wonder is, not that it is reproduced now but that it has not been
reproduced before. But the difficulty has been to find a satisfactory
copy. Many as have been the editions, few copies have been preserved. It
was a book children were fond of and wore out in turning the leaves over
and over to see the pictures. Then as the old copper-plates became
indistinct they were replaced by wood-engravings, of coarse execution,
and often of changed treatment. Von Raumer complains that the edition of
1755 substitutes for the original cut of the Soul, (No. 43, as here
given,) a picture of an eye, and in a table the figures I. I. II. I. I.
II., and adds that it is difficult to recognize in this an expressive
psychological symbol, and to explain it. In an edition I have, published
in Vienna in 1779, this cut is omitted altogether, and indeed there are
but 82 in place of the 157 found in earlier editions, the following, as
numbered in this edition, being omitted:

1, the alphabet, 2, 36, 43, 45, 66, 68, 75, 76, 78-80, 87, 88, 92-122,
124, 126, 128, 130-141.

On the other hand, the Vienna edition contains a curious additional cut.
It gives No. 4, the Heaven, practically as in this edition, but puts
another cut under it in which the earth is revolving about the sun; and
after the statement of Comenius, “_Coelum rotatur, et ambit terram, in
medio stantem_” interpolates: “_prout veteres crediderunt; recentiores
enim defendunt motum terrae circa solem_” [as the ancients used to
think; for later authorities hold that the motion of the earth is about
the sun.]

Two specimen pages from another edition are inserted in Payne’s
Compayré’s History of Education (between pp. 126, 127). The cut is the
representative of No. 103 in this edition, but those who compare them
will see not only how much coarser is the execution of the wood-cut
Prof. Payne has copied, but what liberties have been taken with the
design. The only change in the Latin text, however, is from _Designat
Figuras rerum_ in the original, to _Figuram rerum designat_.

In this edition the cuts are unusually clear copies of the copper-plates
of the first edition of 1658, from which we have also taken the Latin
text. The text for the English translation is from the English edition
of 1727, in which for the first time the English words were so arranged
as to stand opposite their Latin equivalents.

The cuts have been reproduced with great care by the photographic
process. I thought best not to permit them to be retouched, preferring
occasional indistinctness to modern tampering with the originals that
would make them less authentic.

The English text is unchanged from that of the 1727 edition, except in
rare instances where substitutions have been made for single words not
now permissible. The typography suggests rather than imitates the
quaintness of the original, and the paper was carefully selected to
produce so far as practicable the impression of the old hand-presses.

In short my aim has been to put within the reach of teachers at a
moderate price a satisfactory reproduction of this important book; and
if the sale of the _Orbis Pictus_ seems to warrant it, I hope
subsequently to print as a companion volume the _Vestibulum_ and _Janua_
of the same author, of which I have choice copies.

  C. W. BARDEEN.

  _Syracuse, Sept. 28, 1887_.




COMMENTS UPON THE ORBIS PICTUS.


During four years he here prosecuted his efforts in behalf of education
with commendable success, and wrote, among other works, his celebrated
Orbis Pictus, which has passed through a great many editions, and
survived a multitude of imitations. --SMITH’S HISTORY OF EDUCATION,
N.Y., 1842, p. 129.

The most eminent educator of the seventeenth century, however, was John
Amos Comenius...... His Orbis Sensualium Pictus, published in 1657,
enjoyed a still higher renown. The text was much the same with the
Janua, being intended as a kind of elementary encyclopædia; but _it
differed from all previous text-books_, in being illustrated with
pictures, on copper and wood, of the various topics discussed in it.
This book was universally popular. In those portions of Germany where
the schools had been broken up by the “Thirty years’ war,” mothers
taught their children from its pages. Corrected and amended by later
editors, it continued for nearly two hundred years, to be a text-book of
the German schools. --HISTORY AND PROGRESS OF EDUCATION, BY
PHILOBIBLIUS, N.Y., 1860, p. 210.

The “Janua” would, therefore, have had but a short-lived popularity with
teachers, and a still shorter with learners, if Comenius had not carried
out his principle of appealing to the senses, and called in the artist.
The result was the “Orbis Pictus,” a book which proved a favorite with
young and old, and maintained its ground in many a school for more than
a century.... I am sorry I cannot give a specimen of this celebrated
book with its quaint pictures. The artist, of course, was wanting in the
technical skill which is now commonly displayed even in the cheapest
publications, but this renders his delineations none the less
entertaining. As a picture of the life and manners of the
seventeenthcentury, the work has great historical interest, which will,
I hope, secure for it another English edition. --QUICK’S EDUCATIONAL
REFORMERS, 1868; Syracuse edition, p. 79.

But the principle on which he most insisted is that the teaching of
words and things must go together, hand in hand. When we consider how
much time is spent over new languages, what waste of energy is lavished
on mere preparation, how it takes so long to lay a foundation that there
is no time to lay a building upon it, we must conclude that it is in the
acceptance and development of this principle that the improvement of
education will in the future consist. Any one who attempts to inculcate
this great reform will find that its first principles are contained in
the writings of Comenius. --ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA, 9th edition, vii.
674.

The first edition of this celebrated book was published at Nuremberg in
1657; soon after a translation was made into English by Charles Hoole.
The last English edition appeared in 1777, and this was reprinted in
America in 1812. This was the first illustrated school-book, and was the
first attempt at what now passes under the name of “object lessons.”
--SHORT HISTORY OF EDUCATION, W. H. PAYNE, Syracuse, 1881, p. 103.

Of these, the “Janua” and the “Orbis” were translated into most European
and some of the Oriental languages. It is evident that these practices
of Comenius contain the germs of things afterwards connected with the
names of Pestalozzi and Stow. It also may be safely assumed that many
methods that are now in practical use, were then not unknown to earliest
teachers. --GILL’S SYSTEMS OF EDUCATION, London, 1876, p. 13.

The more we reflect on the method of Comenius, the more we shall see it
is replete with suggestiveness, and we shall feel surprised that so much
wisdom can have lain in the path of schoolmasters for two hundred and
fifty years, and that they have never stooped to avail themselves of its
treasures. --BROWNING’S INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF EDUCATIONAL
THEORIES, 1882, New York edition, p. 67.

The “Orbis Pictus,” the first practical application of the intuitive
method, had an extraordinary success, and has served as a model for the
innumerable illustrated books which for three centuries have invaded the
schools. --COMPAYRE’S HISTORY OF PEDAGOGY, Payne’s translation, Boston,
1886, p. 127.

He remained at Patak four years, which were characterized by surprising
literary activity. During this short period he produced no less than
fifteen different works, among them his “World Illustrated” (_Orbis
Pictus_), the most famous of all his writings. It admirably applied the
principle that words and things should be learned together.... The
“World Illustrated” had an enormous circulation, and remained for a long
time the most popular text-book in Europe. --PAINTER’S HISTORY OF
EDUCATION, N.Y., 1886, p. 206.

Or, si ce livre n’est qu’un équivalent se la véritable intuition; si,
ensuite, le contenu du tout paraît fort défectueux, au point de vue de
la science de nos jours; si, enfin, un effort exagéré pour l’intégrité
de la conception de l’enfant a créé, pour les choses modernes, trop de
dénominations latines qui paraissent douteuses, l’Orbis pictus était
pourtant, pour son temps, une oeuvre très originale et très spirituelle,
qui fit faire un grand progrès à la pédagogie et servit longtemps de
livre d’école utile et de modèle à d’innombrables livres d’images,
souvent pires. --HISTOIRE D’ ÉDUCATION, FREDERICK DITTES, Redolfi’s
French translation, Paris, 1880, p. 178.

Here Comenius wrote, among others, his second celebrated work the “Orbis
Pictus.” He was not, however, able to finish it in Hungary for want of a
skilful engraver on copper. For such a one he carried it to Michael
Endter, the bookseller at Nuremberg, but the engraving delayed the
publication of the book for three years more. In 1657 Comenius expressed
the hope that it would appear during the next autumn. With what great
approbation the work was received at its first appearance, is shown by
the fact that within two years, in 1659, Endter had published a second
enlarged edition. --KARL VON RAUMER, translated in Barnard’s Journal of
Education, v. 260.

The “Janua” had an enormous sale, and was published in many languages,
but the editions and sale of the “Orbis Pictus” far exceeded those of
the “Janua,” and, indeed, for some time it was the most popular
text-book in Europe, and deservedly so. --LAURIE’S JOHN AMOS COMENIUS,
Boston edition, p. 185.




  Joh. Amos Comenii

  ORBIS SENSUALIUM PICTUS:

    hoc est

  Omnium principalium in Mundo
  Rerum, & in Vita Actionum,

  PICTURA & NOMENCLATURA.


  Joh. Amos Comenius’s

  VISIBLE WORLD:

    or, a

  NOMENCLATURE, AND PICTURES

    of all the

  CHIEF THINGS that are in the WORLD, and
    of MENS EMPLOYMENTS therein;

  In above 150 COPPER CUTS.

    Written

  By the Author in Latin and High Dutch, being
    one of his last ESSAYS; and the most suitable to
    Childrens Capacity of any he hath hitherto made.


  Translated into English
  By CHARLES HOOLE, M.A.
  For the Use of Young Latin Scholars.

  The ELEVENTH EDITION Corrected, and the English made to
  answer Word for Word to the Latin.

  _Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu._ Arist.

  _London_; Printed for, and sold by _John_ and _Benj._
  _Sprint_, at the _Bell_ in _Little Britain_, 1728.




_Gen._ ii. 19, 20.

The Lord God brought unto _Adam_ every Beast of the Field, and every
Fowl of the Air, to see what he would call them. And _Adam_ gave Names
to all Cattle, and to the Fowl of the Air, and to every Beast of the
Field.

Gen. ii. 19, 20.

_Adduxit Dominus Deus ad _Adam_ cuncta Animantia Terræ, & universa
volatilia Cœli, ut videret quomodo vocaret illa. Appellavitque _Adam_
Nominibus suis cuncta Animantia, & universa volatilia Cœli, & omnes
Bestias Agri._

I. A. Comenii opera Didactica par. 1. p. 6, Amst. 1657. fol.

Didacticæ nostræ prora & puppis esto: Investigare, & invenire modum, quo
Docentes minus doceant, Discentes vero plus discant: Scholæ minus
habeant Strepitus, nauseæ, vani laboris; plus autem otii, deliciarum,
solidique profectus: Respublica Christiana minus tenebrarum confusionis
dissidiorum; plus lucis, ordinis, pacis & tranquilitatis.




THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE READER.


_Instruction is the means to expel Rudeness_, with which young wits
ought to be well furnished in Schools: But so, as that the teaching be
1. _True_, 2. _Full_, 3. _Clear_, and 4. _Solid_.

1. It will be _true_, if nothing be taught but such as is beneficial to
ones life; lest there be a cause of complaining afterwards. We know not
necessary things, because we have not learned things necessary.

2. It will be _full_, if the mind be polished for wisdom, the tongue for
eloquence, and the hands for a neat way of living. This will be that
_grace_ of one’s life, _to be wise, to act, to speak_.

3, 4. It will be _clear_, and by that, firm and _solid_, if whatever is
taught and learned, be not obscure, or confused, but apparent, distinct,
and articulate, as the fingers on the hands.

The ground of this business, is, that sensual objects may be rightly
presented to the senses, for fear they may not be received. I say, and
say it again aloud, that this last is the foundation of all the rest:
because we can neither act nor speak wisely, unless we first rightly
understand all the things which are to be done, and whereof we are to
speak. Now there is nothing in the understanding, which was not before
in the sense. And therefore to exercise the senses well about the right
perceiving the differences of things, will be to lay the grounds for all
wisdom, and all wise discourse, and all discreet actions in ones course
of life. Which, because it is commonly neglected in schools, and the
things which are to be learned are offered to scholars, without being
understood or being rightly presented to the senses, it cometh to pass,
that the work of teaching and learning goeth heavily onward, and
affordeth little benefit.

See here then a new help for schools, A Picture and Nomenclature of all
the chief things in the world, and of men’s actions in their way of
living: Which, that you, good Masters, may not be loath to run over with
your scholars, I will tell you, in short, what good you may expect from
it.

It is _a little Book_, as you see, of no great bulk, yet a brief of the
whole world, and a whole language: full of Pictures, Nomenclatures, and
Descriptions of things.

I. _The Pictures_ are the representation of all visible things, (to
which also things invisible are reduced after their fashion) of the
whole world. And that in that very order of things, in which they are
described in the _Janua Latinæ Linguæ_; and with that fulness, that
nothing very necessary or of great concernment is omitted.

II. _The Nomenclatures_ are the Inscriptions, or Titles set every one
over their own Pictures, expressing the whole thing by its own general
term.

III. _The Descriptions_ are the explications of the parts of the
Picture, so expressed by their own proper terms, as that same figure
which is added to every piece of the picture, and the term of it, always
sheweth what things belongeth one to another.

Which such Book, and in such a dress may (I hope) serve,

I. To entice witty children to it, that they may not conceit a torment
to be in the school, but dainty fare. For it is apparent, that children
(even from their infancy almost) are delighted with Pictures, and
willingly please their eyes with these lights: And it will be very well
worth the pains to have once brought it to pass, that scare-crows may be
taken away out of Wisdom’s Gardens.

II. This same little Book will serve to stir up the Attention, which is
to be fastened upon things, and even to be sharpened more and more:
which is also a great matter. For the Senses (being the main guides of
childhood, because therein the mind doth not as yet raise up itself to
an abstracted contemplation of things) evermore seek their own objects,
and if they be away, they grow dull, and wry themselves hither and
thither out of a weariness of themselves: but when their objects are
present, they grow merry, wax lively, and willingly suffer themselves to
be fastened upon them, till the thing be sufficiently discerned. This
Book then will do a good piece of service in taking (especially
flickering) wits, and preparing them for deeper studies.

III. Whence a third good will follow; that children being won hereunto,
and drawn over with this way of heeding, may be furnished with the
knowledge of the prime things that are in the world, by sport and merry
pastime. In a word, this Book will serve for the more pleasing using of
the _Vestibulum_ and _Janua Linguarum_, for which end it was even at the
first chiefly intended. Yet if it like any, that it be bound up in their
native tongues also, it promiseth three good thing of itself.

I. First it will afford a device for learning to read more easily than
hitherto, especially having a symbolical alphabet set before it, to wit,
the characters of the several letters, with the image of that creature,
whose voice that letter goeth about to imitate, pictur’d by it. For the
young _Abc_ scholar will easily remember the force of every character by
the very looking upon the creature, till the imagination being
strengthened by use, can readily afford all things; and then having
looked over a _table of the chief syllables_ also (which yet was not
thought necessary to be added to this book) he may proceed to the
viewing of the Pictures, and the inscriptions set over ’em. Where again
the very looking upon the thing pictured suggesting the name of the
thing, will tell him how the title of the picture is to be read. And
thus the whole book being gone over by the bare titles of the pictures,
reading cannot but be learned; and indeed too, which thing is to be
noted, without using any ordinary tedious spelling, that most
troublesome torture of wits, which may wholly be avoided by this method.
For the often reading over the Book, by those larger descriptions of
things, and which are set after the Pictures, will be able perfectly to
beget a habit of reading.

II. The same book being used in English, in English Schools, will serve
for the perfect learning of the whole English tongue, and that from the
bottom; because by the aforesaid descriptions of things, the words and
phrases of the whole language are found set orderly in their own places.
And a short English Grammar might be added at the end, clearly resolving
the speech already understood into its parts; shewing the declining of
the several words, and reducing those that are joined together under
certain rules.

III. Thence a new benefit cometh, that that very English Translation may
serve for the more ready and pleasant learning of the Latin tongue: as
one may see in this Edition, the whole book being so translated, that
every where one word answereth to the word over against it, and the book
is in all things the same, only in two idioms, as a man clad in a double
garment. And there might be also some observations and advertisements
added in the end, touching those things only, wherein the use of the
Latin tongue differeth from the English. For where there is no
difference, there needeth no advertisement to be given. But, because the
first _tasks of learners ought to be little and single_, we have filled
this first book of training one up to see a thing of himself, with
nothing but rudiments, that is, with the chief of things and words, or
with the grounds of the whole world, and the whole language, and of all
our understanding about things. If a more perfect description of things,
and a fuller knowledge of a language, and a clearer light of the
understanding be sought after (as they ought to be) they are to be found
somewhere whither there will now be an easy passage by this our _little
Encyclopædia_ of things subject to the senses. Something remaineth to be
said touching the more chearful use of this book.

I. Let it be given to children into their hands to delight themselves
withal as they please, with the sight of the pictures, and making them
as familiar to themselves as may be, and that even at home before they
be put to school.

II. Then let them be examined ever and anon (especially now in the
school) what this thing or that thing is, and is called, so that they
may see nothing which they know not how to name, and that they can name
nothing which they cannot shew.

III. And let the things named them be shewed, not only in the Picture,
but also in themselves; for example, the parts of the body, clothes,
books, the house, utensils, &c.

IV. Let them be suffered also to imitate the Pictures by hand, if they
will, nay rather, let them be encouraged, that they may be willing:
first, thus to quicken the attention also towards the things; and to
observe the proportion of the parts one towards another; and lastly to
practise the nimbleness of the hand, which is good for many things.

V. If anything here mentioned, cannot be presented to the eye, it will
be to no purpose at all to offer them by themselves to the scholars; as
colours, relishes, &c., which cannot here be pictured out with ink. For
which reason it were to be wished, that things rare and not easy to be
met withal at home, might be kept ready in every great school, that they
may be shewed also, as often as any words are to be made of them, to the
scholars.

Thus at last this school would indeed become a school of things obvious
to the senses, and an entrance to the school intellectual. But enough:
Let us come to the thing it self.




THE TRANSLATOR, TO ALL JUDICIOUS AND INDUSTRIOUS SCHOOL-MASTERS.


Gentlemen.

There are a few of you (I think) but have seen, and with great
willingness made use of (or at least perused,) many of the Books of this
well-deserving Author Mr. John Comenius, which for their profitableness
to the speedy attainment of a language, have been translated in several
countries, out of Latin into their own native tongue.

Now the general verdict (after trial made) that hath passed, touching
those formerly extant, is this, that they are indeed of singular use,
and very advantageous to those of more discretion, (especially to such
as already have a smattering of Latin) to help their memories to retain
what they have scatteringly gotten here and there, to furnish them with
many words, which (perhaps) they had not formerly read, or so well
observed; but to young children (whom we have chiefly to instruct) as
those that are ignorant altogether of things and words, and prove rather
a meer toil and burthen, than a delight and furtherance.

For to pack up many words in memory, of things not conceived in the
mind, is to fill the head with empty imaginations, and to make the
learner more to admire the multitude and variety (and thereby, to become
discouraged,) than to care to treasure them up, in hopes to gain more
knowledge of what they mean.

He hath therefore in some of his latter works seemed to move retrograde,
and striven to come nearer the reach of tender wits: and in this present
Book, he hath, according to my judgment, descended to the very bottom of
what is to be taught, and proceeded (as nature it self doth) in an
orderly way; first to exercise the senses well, by representing their
objects to them, and then to fasten upon the intellect by impressing the
first notions of things upon it, and linking them on to another by a
rational discourse. Whereas indeed, we, generally missing this way, do
teach children as we do parrots, to speak they know not what, nay which
is worse, we, taking the way of teaching little ones by Grammar only at
the first, do puzzle their imaginations with abstractive terms and
secondary intentions, which till they be somewhat acquainted with
things, and the words belonging to them, in the language which they
learn, they cannot apprehend what they mean. And this I guess to be the
reason, why many great persons do resolve sometimes not to put a child
to school till he be at least eleven or twelve years of age, presuming
that he having then taken notice of most things, will sooner get the
knowledge of the words which are applyed to them in any language. But
the gross misdemeanor of such children for the most part, have taught
many parents to be hasty enough to send their own to school, if not that
they may learn, yet (at least) that they might be kept out of harm’s
way; and yet if they do not profit for the time they have been at
school, (no respect at all being had for their years) the Master shall
be sure enough to bear the blame.

So that a School-master had need to bend his wits to come within the
compass of a child’s capacity of six or seven years of age (seeing we
have now such commonly brought to our Grammar-schools to learn the Latin
Tongue) and to make that they may learn with as much delight and
willingness, as himself would teach with dexterity and ease. And at
present I know no better help to forward his young scholars than this
little Book, which was for this purpose contrived by the Author in the
German and Latin Tongues.

What profitable use may be had thereof, respecting chiefly that his own
country and language, he himself hath told you in his preface; but what
use we may here make of it in our Grammar-schools, as it is now
translated into English, I shall partly declare; leaving all other men,
according to my wont, to their own discretion and liberty, to use or
refuse it, as they please. So soon then as a child can read English
perfectly, and is brought to us to school to learn Latin, I would have
him together with his Accidence, to be provided of this Book, in which
he may at least once a day (beside his Accidence) be thus exercised.

I. Let him look over the pictures with their general titles and
inscriptions, till he be able to turn readily to any one of them, and to
tell its name either in English or Latin. By this means he shall have
the method of the Book in his head; and be easily furnished with the
knowledge of most things; and instructed how to call them, when at any
time he meeteth with them elsewhere, in their real forms.

II. Let him read the description at large: First in English, and
afterward in Latin, till he can readily read, and distinctly pronounce
the words in both Languages, ever minding how they are spelled. And
withal, let him take notice of the figures inserted, and to what part of
the picture they direct by their like till he be well able to find out
every particular thing of himself, and to name it on a sudden, either in
English or Latin. Thus he shall not only gain the most primitive words,
but be understandingly grounded in Orthography, which is a thing too
generally neglected by us; partly because our English schools think that
children should learn it at the Latin, and our Latin schools suppose
they have already learn’d it at the English; partly, because our common
Grammar is too much defective in this part, and scholars so little
exercised therein, that they pass from schools to the Universities and
return from thence (some of them) more unable to write true English,
than either Latin or Greek. Not to speak of our ordinary Tradesmen, many
of whom write such false English, that none but themselves can interpret
what they scribble in their bills and shop-books.

III. Then let him get the Titles and Descriptions by heart, which he
will more easily do, by reason of these impressions which the viewing of
the pictures hath already made in his memory. And now let him also
learn, 1. To construe, or give the words one by one, as they answer one
another in Latin and English. 2. To Parse, according to the rules,
(which I presume by this time) he hath learn’d in the first part of his
Accidence; where I would have him tell what part of Speech any word is,
and then what accidents belong to it; but especially to decline the
nouns and conjugate the verbs according to the Examples in his
Rudiments; and this doing will enable him to know the end and use of his
Accidence. As for the Rules of Genders of Nouns, and the
Præter-perfect-tenses and Supines of Verbs, and those of Concordance and
Construction in the latter part of the Accidence, I would not have a
child much troubled with them, till by the help of this Book he can
perfectly practise so much of Etymology, as concerns the first part of
his Accidence only. For that, and this book together, being thoroughly
learn’d by at least thrice going them over, will much prepare children
to go chearfully forward in their Grammar and School-Authors,
especially, if whilst they are employed herein, they be taught also to
write a fair and legible hand.

There is one thing to be given notice of, which I wish could have been
remedied in this Translation; that the Book being writ in high-Dutch
doth express many things in reference to that Country and Speech, which
cannot without alteration of some Pictures as well as words be expressed
in ours: for the Symbolical Alphabet is fitted for German children
rather than for ours. And whereas the words of that Language go orderly
one for one with the Latin, our English propriety of Speech will not
admit the like. Therefore it will behove those Masters that intend to
make use of this Book, to construe it verbatim to their young Scholars,
who will quickly learn to do it of themselves, after they be once
acquainted with the first words of Nouns, and Verbs, and their manner of
variation.

Such a work as this, I observe to have been formerly much desired by
some experienced Teachers, and I my self had some years since (whilst my
own Child lived) begun the like, having found it most agreeable to the
best witted Children, who are most taken up with Pictures from their
Infancy, because by them the knowledge of things which they seem to
represent (and whereof Children are as yet ignorant) are most easily
conveyed to the Understanding. But for as much as the work is now done,
though in some things not so completely as it were to be wished, I
rejoyce in the use of it, and desist in my own undertakings for the
present. And because any good thing is the better, being the more
communicated; I have herein imitated a Child who is forward to impart to
others what himself has well liked. You then that have the care of
little Children, do not much trouble their thoughts and clog their
memories with bare Grammar Rudiments, which to them are harsh in
getting, and fluid in retaining; because indeed to them they signifie
nothing, but a mere swimming notion of a general term, which they know
not what it meaneth, till they comprehend particulars, but by this or
the like subsidiary, inform them, first with some knowledge of things
and words wherewith to express them, and then their Rules of speaking
will be better understood and more firmly kept in mind. Else how should
a Child conceive what a Rule meaneth, when he neither knoweth what the
Latin word importeth, nor what manner of thing it is which is signified
to him in his own native Language, which is given him thereby to
understand the Rule? For Rules consisting of generalities, are delivered
(as I may say) at a third hand, presuming first the things, and then the
words to be already apprehended touching which they are made. I might
indeed enlarge upon this Subject, it being the very Basis of our
Profession, to search into the way of Childrens taking hold by little
and little of what we teach them, that so we may apply ourselves to
their reach: But I leave the observation thereof to your own daily
exercise, and experience got thereby.

And I pray God, the fountain and giver of all wisdom, that hath bestowed
upon us this gift of Teaching, so to inspire and direct us by his Grace,
that we may train up Children in his Fear and in the knowledge of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and then no doubt our teaching and their
learning of other things subordinate to these, will by the assistance of
his blessed Spirit make them able and willing to do him faithful Service
both in Church and Commonwealth, as long as they live here, that so they
may be eternally blessed with him hereafter. This, I beseech you, beg
for me and mine, as I shall daily do for you and yours, at the throne of
God’s heavenly grace; and remain while I live

Ready to serve you, as I truly love and honour you, and labour willingly
in the same Profession with you,

CHARLES HOOLE.

From my School, in

  _Lothbury, London, Jan. 25, 1658_.




_N.B._ Those Heads or Descriptions which concern things beyond the
present apprehension of Children’s wits, as, those of Geography,
Astronomy, or the like, I would have omitted, till the rest be learned,
and a Child be _better able to understand them_.

_The Judgment of Mr. _Hezekiah Woodward_, sometimes an _eminent
Schoolmaster in LONDON_, touching a work of this Nature; in his _Gate to
Science_, chap. 2._

Certainly _the use of Images or Representations is great_: If we could
make our words as legible to Children as Pictures are, their information
therefrom would be quickned and surer. But so we cannot do, though we
must do what we can. And if we had Books, wherein are the Pictures of
all Creatures, Herbs, Beasts, Fish, Fowls, they would stand us in great
stead. For Pictures are the most intelligible Books that Children can
look upon. They come closest to Nature, nay, saith Scaliger, Art exceeds
her.




AN ADVERTISEMENT CONCERNING THIS EDITION.


As there are some considerable Alterations in the present Edition of
this Book from the former, it may be expected an Account should be given
of the Reasons for them. ’Tis certain from the Author’s Words, that when
it was first published, which was in Latin and Hungary, or in Latin and
High-Dutch; every where one word answer’d to another over-against it:
This might have been observ’d in our English Translation, which wou’d
have fully answer’d the design of COMENIUS, and have made the Book much
more useful: But Mr. Hoole, (whether out of too much scrupulousness to
disturb the Words in some places from the order they were in, or not
sufficiently considering the Inconveniences of having the Latin and
English so far asunder) has made them so much disagree, that a Boy has
sometimes to seek 7 or 8 lines off for the corresponding Word; which is
no small trouble to Young Learners who are at first equally unacquainted
with all Words, in a Language they are strangers to, except it be such
as have Figures of Reference, or are very like in sound; and thus may
perhaps, innocently enough join an Adverb in one Tongue, to a Noun in
the other; whence may appear the Necessity of the Translation’s being
exactly literal, and the two Languages fairly answering one another,
Line for Line.

If it be objected, such a thing cou’d not be done (considering the
difference of the Idioms) without transplacing Words here and there, and
putting them into an order which may not perhaps be exactly classical;
it ought to be observed, this is design’d for Boys chiefly, or those who
are just entering upon the Latin Tongue, to whom every thing ought to be
made as plain and familiar as possible, who are not, at their first
beginning, to be taught the elegant placing of Latin, nor from such
short Sentences as these, but from Discourses where the Periods have a
fuller Close. Besides, this way has already taken (according to the
Advice of very good Judges,) in some other School-Books of Mr. Hoole’s
translating, and found to succeed abundantly well.

Such Condescensions as these, to the capacities of young Learners are
certainly very reasonable, and wou’d be most agreeable to the Intentions
of the Ingenious and worthy Author, and his design to suit whatever he
taught, to their manner of apprehending it. Whose Excellency in the art
of Education made him so famous all over Europe, as to be solicited by
several States and Princes to go and reform the Method of their Schools;
and whose works carried that Esteem, that in his own Life-time some part
of them were not only translated into 12 of the usual Languages of
Europe, but also into the _Arabic_, _Turkish_, _Persian_, and _Mogolic_
(the common Tongue of all that part of the _East-Indies_) and since his
death, into the _Hebrew_, and some others. Nor did they want their due
Encouragement here in _England_, some Years ago; ’till by an indiscreet
use of them, and want of a thorow acquaintance with his Method, or
unwillingness to part from their old road, they began to be almost quite
left off: Yet it were heartily to be wish’d, some Persons of Judgment
and Interest, whose Example might have an influence upon others, and
bring them into Reputation again, wou’d revive the COMENIAN METHOD,
which is no other, than to make our Scholars learn with Delight and
chearfulness, and to convey a solid and useful Knowledge of Things, with
that of Languages, in an easy, natural and familiar way. _Didactic
Works_ (as they are now collected into one volume) for a speedy
attaining the Knowledge of Things and Words, join’d with the Discourses
of Mr. Lock[A] and 2 or 3 more out of our own Nation, for forming the
Mind and settling good Habits, may doubtless be look’d upon to contain
the most reasonable, orderly, and completed System of the Art of
Education, that can be met with.

[Footnote A: Mr. Lock’s Essay upon Education.

Dr. Tabor’s Christian Schoolmaster.

Dr. Ob. Walker of Education.

Mr. Monro’s Essay on Education.

--His just Measures of the pious Institutions of Youth, &c.]

Yet, alas! how few are there, who follow the way they have pointed out?
tho’ every one who seriously considers it, must be convinc’d of the
Advantage; and the generality of Schools go on in the same old dull
road, wherein a great part of Children’s time is lost in a tiresome
heaping up a Pack of dry and unprofitable, or pernicious Notions (for
surely little better can be said of a great part of that Heathenish
stuff they are tormented with; like the feeding them with hard Nuts,
which when they have almost broke their teeth with cracking, they find
either deaf or to contain but very rotten and unwholesome Kernels)
whilst Things really perfected of the understanding, and useful in every
state of Life, are left unregarded, to the Reproach of our Nation, where
all other Arts are improved and flourish well, only this of Education of
Youth is at a stand; as if that, the good or ill management of which is
of the utmost consequence to all, were a thing not worth any Endeavors
to improve it, or was already so perfect and well executed that it
needed none, when many of the greatest Wisdom and Judgment in several
Nations, have with a just indignation endeavor’d to expose it, and to
establish a more easy and useful way in its room.

’Tis not easy to say little on so important a subject, but thus much may
suffice for the present purpose. The Book has merit enough to recommend
it self to those who know how to make a right use of it. It was reckon’d
one of the Author’s best performances; and besides the many Impressions
and Translations it has had in parts beyond Sea, has been several times
reprinted here. It was endeavor’d no needless Alterations shou’d be
admitted in this Edition, and as little of any as cou’d consist with the
design of making it plain and useful; to shun the offence it might give
to some; and only the Roman and Italic Character alternately made use
of, where transplacing of Words cou’d be avoided.

J. H.

  London,
  July 13, 1727.




Orbis Sensualium Pictus,

A World of Things Obvious to the Senses drawn in Pictures.




  I.

  Invitation.
    Invitatio.

  [Illustration]


  _The Master and the Boy._
    _Magister & Puer._

  M. Come, Boy, learn to be wise.
    M. Veni, Puer, disce sapere.

  P. What doth this mean, _to be wise_?
    P. Quid hoc est, _Sapere_?

  M. To understand rightly,
  to do rightly,
  and to speak out rightly
  all that are necessary.
    M. Intelligere recte,
    agere recte,
    et eloqui recte
    omnia necessaria.

  P. Who will teach me this?
    P. Quis docebit me hoc?

  M. I, by God’s help.
    M. Ego, cum DEO.

  P. How?
    P. Quomodo?

  M. I will guide thee thorow all.
    M. Ducam te per omnia.

  I will shew thee all.
    Ostendam tibi omnia.

  I will name thee all.
    Nominabo tibi omnia.

  P. See, here I am;
  lead me in the name of God.
    P. En, adsum;
    duc me in nomine DEI.

  M. Before all things,
  thou oughtest to learn
  the plain _sounds_,
  of which man’s _speech_
  consisteth;
    M. Ante omnia,
    debes discere
    simplices _Sonos_
    ex quibus _Sermo_ humanus
    constat;
  which _living creatures_
  know how _to make_,
  and thy _Tongue_
  knoweth how to _imitate_,
  and thy _hand_
  can _picture out_.
    quos _Animalia_
    sciunt _formare_,
    & tua _Lingua_
    scit _imitari_,
    & tua _Manus_
    potest _pingere_.

  Afterwards we will go
  into the _World_,
  and we will view all things.
    Postea ibimus
    Mundum,
    & spectabimus omnia.

  Here thou hast a lively
  and Vocal Alphabet.
    Hic habes vivum
    et vocale Alphabetum.

  [Illustrations]

  [Transcriber’s Note: Each item has a separate small illustration.
  Note that the letters of the alphabet refer to the sound, not to
  the English or Latin word.]

  _Cornix_ cornicatur, à à
  The _Crow_ crieth.
      A a

  _Agnus_ balat, b è è è
  The _Lamb_ blaiteth.
      B b

  _Cicàda_ stridet, cì cì
  The _Grasshopper_ chirpeth.
      C c

  _Upupa_ dicit, du du
  The _Whooppoo_ saith.
      D d

  _Infans_ ejulat, è è è
  The _Infant_ crieth.
      E e

  _Ventus_ flat, fi fi
  The _Wind_ bloweth.
      F f

  _Anser_ gingrit, ga ga
  The _Goose_ gagleth.
      G g

  _Os_ halat, hà’h hà’h
  The _Mouth_ breatheth.
      H h

  _Mus_ mintrit, ì ì ì
  The _Mouse_ chirpeth.
      I i

  _Anas_ tetrinnit, kha, kha
  The _Duck_ quaketh.
      K k

  _Lupus_ ululat, lu ulu
  The _Wolf_ howleth.
      L

  _Ursus_ murmurat, mum mum
  The _Bear_ grumbleth.
      M m

  _Felis_ clamat, nau nau
  The _Cat_ crieth.
      N n

  _Auriga_ clamat, ò ò ò
  The _Carter_ crieth.
      O o

  _Pullus_ pipit, pi pi
  The _Chicken_ peepeth.
      P p

  _Cúculus_ cuculat, kuk ku
  The _cuckow_ singeth.
      Q q

  _Canis_ ringitur, err
  The _dog_ grinneth.
      R r

  _Serpens_ sibilat, si
  The _Serpent_ hisseth.
      S s

  _Graculus_ clamat, tac tac
  The _Jay_ crieth.
      T t

  _Bubo_ ululat, ù ù
  The _Owl_ hooteth.
      U u

  _Lepus_ vagit, va
  The _Hare_ squeaketh.
      W w

  _Rana_ coaxat, coax
  The _Frog_ croaketh.
      X x

  _Asinus_ rudit, y y y
  The _Asse_ brayeth.
      Y y

  _Tabanus_ dicit, ds ds
  The _Breeze_ or _Horse-flie_ saith.
      Z z




  II.

  God.
    Deus.

  [Illustration]


  _God_ is of himself
  from everlasting to everlasting.
    _Deus_ est ex seipso,
    ab æterno in æternum.

  A most perfect
  and a most blessed _Being_.
    Perfectissimum
    & beatissimum _Ens_.

  In his _Essence_ Spiritual,
  and One.
    _Essentiâ_ Spiritualis
    & unus.

  In his _Personality_, Three.
    _Hypostasi_ Trinus.

  In his _Will_, Holy, Just,
  Merciful and True.
    _Voluntate_, Sanctus, Justus,
    Clemens, Verax.

  In his _Power_ very great.
    _Potentiâ_ maximus.

  In his _Goodness_, very good.
    _Bonitate_ Optimus.

  In his _Wisdom_, unmeasurable.
    _Sapientiâ_, immensus.

  A _Light_ inaccessible;
  and yet all in all.
    _Lux_ inaccessa;
    & tamen omnia in omnibus.

  Every where, and no where.
    Ubique & nullibi.

  The chiefest _Good_, and
  the only and inexhausted
  Fountain of all good things.
    Summum _Bonum_, et
    solus et inexhaustus
    Fons omnium Bonorum.

  As the _Creator_, so the
  _Governour_ and _Preserver_
  of all things, which we call
  the _World_.
    Ut _Creator_, ita
    _Gubernator_ et _Conservator_
    omnium rerum, quas vocamus
    _Mundum_.




  III.

  The World.
    Mundus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Heaven_, 1.
  hath _Fire_, and _Stars_.
    _Cœlum_, 1.
    habet _Ignem_ & _Stellas_.

  The _Clouds_, 2.
  hang in the _Air_.
    _Nubes_, 2.
    pendent in _Aere_.

  _Birds_, 3.
  fly under the Clouds.
    _Aves_, 3.
    volant sub nubibus.

  _Fishes_, 4.
  swim in the _Water_.
    _Pisces_, 4.
    natant in _Aqua_.

  The _Earth_ hath _Hills_, 5.
  _Woods_, 6. _Fields_, 7.
  _Beasts_, 8. and _Men_, 9.
    _Terra_ habet _Montes_, 5.
    _Sylvas_, 6. _Campos_, 7.
    _Animalia_, 8. _Homines_, 9.

  Thus the greatest _Bodies_
  of the World,
  the four _Elements_,
  are full of
  their own Inhabitants.
    Ita maxima _Corpora_
    Mundi,
    quatuor _Elementa_,
    sunt plena
    Habitatoribus suis.




  IV.

  The Heaven.
    Cœlum.

  [Illustration]


  _The Heaven_, 1.
  is wheeled about, and
  encompasseth the _Earth_, 2.
  standing in the middle.
    _Cœlum_, 1.
    rotatur, &
    ambit _Terram_, 2.
    stantem in medio.

  The _Sun_, 3.
  wheresoever it is,
  shineth perpetually,
  howsoever dark _Clouds_, 4.
  may take it from us;
    _Sol_, 3.
    ubi ubi est,
    fulget perpetuo,
    ut ut _densa Nubila_, 4.
    eripiant eum a nobis;
  and causeth by his _Rays_, 5.
  _Light_, and the Light, _Day_.
    facitque suis _Radiis_, 5.
    _Lucem_, Lux _Diem_.

  On the other side, over against it,
  is _Darkness_, 6.
  and thence _Night_.
    Ex opposito,
    sunt _Tenebræ_, 6.
    inde _Nox_.

  In the Night
  shineth the _Moon_, 7.
  and the _Stars_, 8.
  glister and twinkle.
    Nocte
    splendet _Luna_, 7.
    & _Stellæ_, 8.
    micant, scintillant.

  In the Evening, 9.
  is _Twilight_:
    Vesperi, 9.
    est _Crepusculum_:

  In the _Morning_, 10.
  the breaking,
  and dawning of the Day.
    Manè
    Aurora, 10.
    & Diluculum.




  V.

  Fire.
    Ignis.

  [Illustration]


  The _Fire_ gloweth, burneth
  and consumeth to ashes.
    _Ignis_ ardet, urit,
    cremat.

  A _spark_ of it struck out
  of a _Flint_ (or Firestone), 2.
  by means of a _Steel_, 1.
  and taken by _Tynder_
  in a _Tynder-box_, 3.
  lighteth a _Match_, 4.
    _Scintilla_ ejus elisa
    e _Silice_, (Pyrite) 2.
    Ope _Chalybis_, 1.
    et excepta a _Fomite_
    in _Suscitabulo_, 3.
    accendit _Sulphuratum_, 4.
  and after that a _Candle_, 5.
  or _stick_, 6.
  and causeth a _flame_, 7.
  or _blaze_, 8.
  which catcheth hold of
  the Houses.
    et inde _Candelam_, 5.
    vel _Lignum_, 6.
    et excitat _Flammam_, 7.
    vel _Incendium_, 8.
    quod corripit
    Ædificia.

  _Smoak_, 9.
  ascendeth therefrom,
  which, sticking to
  the _Chimney_, 10.
  turneth into _Soot_.
    _Fumus_, 9.
    ascendit inde,
    qui, adhærans
    _Camino_, 10.
    abit in _Fuliginem_.

  Of a _Fire-brand_,
  (or burning stick)
  is made a _Brand_, 11.
  (or quenched stick).
    Ex _Torre_,
    (ligno ardente,)
    fit _Titio_, 11.
    (lignum extinctum.)

  Of a _hot Coal_
  (red hot piece
  of a Fire-brand)
  is made a _Coal_, 12.
  (or a _dead Cinder_).
    Ex _Pruna_,
    (candente particulâ
    Torris,)
    fit _Carbo_, 12.
    (_Particula mortua_.)

  That which remaineth,
  is at last _Ashes_, 13.
  and _Embers_ (or hot _Ashes_).
    Quod remanet,
    tandem est _Cinis_, 13.
    & _Favilla_ (ardens _Cinis_.)




  VI.

  The Air.
    Aër.

  [Illustration]


  A cool _Air_, 1.
  breatheth gently.
    _Aura_, 1.
    spirat leniter.

  The _Wind_, 2.
  bloweth strongly.
    _Ventus_, 2.
    flat valide.

  A _Storm_, 3.
  throweth down Trees.
    _Procella_, 3.
    sternit Arbores.

  A _Whirl-wind_, 4.
  turneth it self
  in a round compass.
    _Turbo_, 4.
    agit se
    in gyrum.

  A Wind _under Ground_, 5.
  causeth an _Earthquake_.
    Ventus _subterraneus_, 5.
    excitat _Terræ motum_.

  An Earthquake causeth
  gapings of the Earth,
  (and falls of Houses.) 6.
    Terræ motus facit
    Labes (& ruinas.) 6.




  VII.

  The Water.
    Aqua.

  [Illustration]


  The _Water_ springeth
  out of a _Fountain_, 1.
  floweth downwards
  in a _Brook_, 2.
  runneth in a _Beck_, 3.
    _Aqua_ scatet
    è _Fonte_, 1.
    defluit
    in _Torrente_, 2.
    manat in _Rivo_, 3.
  standeth in a _Pond_, 4.
  glideth in a _Stream_, 5.
  is whirled about
  in a _Whirl-pit_, 6.
  and causeth _Fens_, 7.
    stat in _Stagno_, 4.
    fluit in _Flumine_, 5.
    gyratur
    in _Vortice_, 6.
    & facit _Paludes_, 7.

  The _River_ hath _Banks_, 8.
    Flumen habet _Ripas_.

  The _Sea_ maketh _Shores_, 9.
  _Bays_, 10. _Capes_, 11.
  _Islands_, 12.
  _Almost Islands_, 13.
    _Mare_ facit _Littora_, 9.
    _Sìnus_, 10. _Promontoria_, 11.
    _Insulas_, 12.
    _Peninsulas_, 13.
  _Necks of Land_, 14.
  _Straights_, 15.
  and hath in it _Rocks_, 16.
    _Isthmos_, 14.
    _Freta_, 15.
    & habet _Scopulos_, 16.




  VIII.

  The Clouds.
    Nubes.

  [Illustration]


  A _Vapour_, 1. ascendeth
  from the _Water_.
    _Vapor_, 1. ascendit
    ex _Aquâ_.

  From it a _Cloud_, 2.
  is made, and a _white Mist_, 3.
  near the Earth.
    Inde _Nubes_, 2.
    fit, et _Nebula_, 3.
    prope terram.

  _Rain_, 4.
  and a small _Shower_
  distilleth out of a _Cloud_,
  drop by drop.
    _Pluvia_, 4.
    et _Imber_,
    stillat e _Nube_,
    guttatim.

  Which being frozen, is _Hail_, 5.
  half frozen is _Snow_, 6.
  being warm is _Mel-dew_.
    Quæ gelata, _Grando_, 5.
    semigelata, _Nix_, 6.
    calefacta, _Rubigo_ est.

  In a rainy Cloud,
  set over against the Sun
  the _Rainbow_, 7. appeareth.
    In nube pluviosâ,
    oppositâ soli
    _Iris_, 7. apparet.

  A _drop_ falling into the water
  maketh a _Bubble_, 8.
  many _Bubbles_ make
  froth, 9.
    _Gutta_ incidens in aquam,
    facit _Bullam_, 8.
    multæ _Bullæ_ faciunt
    spumam, 9.

  Frozen Water
  is called _Ice_, 10.
  _Dew_ congealed,
  is called a _white Frost_.
    Aqua congelata
    _Glacies_, 10.
    _Ros_ congelatus,
    dicitur _Pruina_.

  _Thunder_ is made of
  a brimstone-like _vapour_,
  which breaking out of a Cloud,
  with _Lightning_, 11.
  thundereth and
  striketh with lightning.
    _Tonitru_ fit ex
    _Vapore_ sulphureo,
    quod erumpens è Nube
    cum _Fulgure_, 11.
    tonat &
    fulminat.




  IX.

  The Earth.
    Terra.

  [Illustration]


  In the _Earth_
  are high _Mountains_, 1.
  Deep _Vallies_, 2.
  _Hills_ rising, 3.
    In _Terra_
    sunt Alti _Montes_, 1.
    Profundæ _valles_, 2.
    Elevati Colles, 3.
  Hollow Caves, 4.
  Plain _Fields_, 5.
  Shady _Woods_, 6.
    cavæ Speluncæ, 4.
    Plani _campi_, 5.
    Opacæ Sylvæ, 6.




  X.

  The Fruits of the Earth.
    Terræ Fœtus.

  [Illustration]


  A _meadow_, 1.
  yieldeth _grass_
  with _Flowers_ and _Herbs_,
  which being cut down,
  are made _Hay_, 2.
    _Pratum_, 1.
    fert _Gramina_,
    cum _Floribus_ & _Herbis_
    quæ defecta
    fiunt _Fænum_, 2.

  A _Field_, 3. yieldeth _Corn_,
  and _Pot-herbs_, 4.
    _Arvum_, 3. fert _Fruges_,
    & _Olera_, 4.

  _Mushrooms_, 5.
  _Straw-berries_, 6.
  _Myrtle-trees_, &c.
  _come up_ in Woods.
    _Fungi_, 5.
    _Fraga_, 6.
    _Myrtilli_, &c.
    _Proveniunt_ in Sylvis.

  _Metals_, _Stones_, and
  _Minerals_
  grow _under the earth_.
    _Metalla_, _Lapides_,
    _Mineralia_,
    _nascuntur sub terra_.




  XI.

  Metals.
    Metalla.

  [Illustration]


  _Lead_, 1.
  is soft, and heavy.
    _Plumbum_, 1.
    est molle & grave.

  _Iron_, 2. is hard,
  and _Steel_, 3. harder.
    _Ferrum_, 2. est durum,
    & _Calybs_, 3. durior.

  They make _Tankards_
  (or _Cans_), 4. of _Tin_.
  _Kettles_, 5. of _Copper_,
  _Candlesticks_, 6. of _Latin_,
    Faciunt _Cantharos_, 4.
    e _Stanno_.
    _Ahena_, 5, e _Cupro_,
    _Candelabra_, 6. ex _Orichalco_,
  _Dollers_, 7. of _Silver_,
  _Ducats_ and _Crown-pieces_, 8.
  of Gold.
    _Thaleros_, 7. ex _Argento_,
    _Scutatos_ et _Coronatos_, 8.
    Ex, _Auro_.

  _Quick-silver_
  is always liquid,
  and eateth thorow _Metals_.
    _Argentum Vivum_,
    semper liquet,
    & corrodit _Metalla_.




  XII.

  Stones.
    Lapides.

  [Illustration]


  _Sand_, 1. and _Gravel_, 2.
  is _Stone_ broken into bits.
    _Arena_, 1. & _Sabulum_, 2.
    est _Lapis_ comminutus.

  A _great Stone_, 3.
  is a piece of
  a _Rock_ (or Crag) 4.
    _Saxum_, 3.
    est pars
    _Petræ_ (Cautis) 4.

  A _Whetstone_, 5.
  a _Flint_, 6. a _Marble_, 7. &c.
  are ordinary Stones.
    _Cos_, 5.
    _Silex_, 6. _Marmor_, 7. &c.
    sunt obscuri Lapides.

  A _Load-stone_, 8.
  draweth Iron to it.
    _Magnes_, 8.
    adtrahit ferrum.

  _Jewels_, 9.
  are clear Stones, as
    _Gemmæ_, 9.
    sunt pellucidi Lapilli,

  The _Diamond_ white
    ut _Adamas_ candidus,

  The _Ruby_ red,
    _Rubinus_ rubeus,

  The _Sapphire_ blue,
    _Sapphirus_ cæruleus,

  The _Emerald_ green,
    _Smaragdus_ viridis,

  The _Jacinth_ yellow, &c.
    _Hyacynthus_ luteus, &c.

  And they glister
  being cut into corners.
    et micant
    angulati.

  _Pearls_ and _Unions_, 10.
  grow in Shell-fish.
    _Margaritæ_ & _Uniones_, 10.
    crescunt in Conchis.

  _Corals_, 11.
  in a Sea-shrub.
    _Corallia_, 11.
    in Marinâ arbusculâ.

  _Amber_, 12. is gathered
  from the Sea.
    _Succinum_, 12. colligitur
    è mari.

  _Glass_, 13, is like
  _Chrystal_.
    _Vitrum_, 13. simile est
    _Chrystallo_.




  XIII.

  Tree.
    Arbor.

  [Illustration]


  A _Plant_, 1. groweth
  from a _Seed_.
    _Planta_, 1. procrescit
    e _Semine_.

  A plant waxeth
  to a _Shoot_, 2.
    Planta abit
    in _Fruticem_, 2.

  A _Shoot_ to a _Tree_, 3.
    _Frutex_ in _Arborem_, 3.

  The _Root_, 4.
  beareth up the Tree.
    _Radix_, 4.
    Sustentat arborem.

  The _Body_ or _Stem_, 5.
  riseth from the Root.
    _Stirps_ (_Stemma_) 5.
    Surgit e radice.

  The _Stem_ divideth it self
  into _Boughs_, 6.
  and green _Branches_, 7.
  made of _Leaves_, 8.
    _Stirps_ se dividit
    in _Ramos_, 6.
    & _Frondes_, 7.
    factas e _Foliis_, 8.

  The _top_, 9.
  is in the height.
    _Cacumen_, 9.
    est in summo.

  The _Stock_, 10.
  is close to the roots.
    _Truncus_, 10.
    adhærat radicibus.

  A _Log_, 11.
  is the body fell’d down
  without Boughs; having
  _Bark_ and _Rind_, 12.
  _Pith_ and _Heart_, 13.
    _Caudex_, 11.
    est Stipes dejectus,
    sine ramis; habens
    _Corticem_ & _Librum_, 12.
    _pulpam_ & _medullam_, 13.

  _Bird-lime_, 14.
  groweth upon the boughs,
  which also sweat
  _Gumm_,
  _Rosin_,
  _Pitch_, &c.
    _Viscum_, 14.
    adnascitur _ramis_,
    qui etiam sudant,
    _Gummi_,
    _Resinam_,
    _Picem_, &c.




  XIV.

  Fruits of Trees.
    Fructus Arborum.

  [Illustration]


  _Fruits_ that have no shells
  are pull’d from
  fruit-bearing trees.
    _Poma_
    decerpuntur, a
    fructiferis arboribus.

  The _Apple_, 1. is round.
    _Malum_, 1. est rotundum.

  The _Pear_, 2. and _Fig_, 3.
  are something long.
    _Pyrum_, 2. & _Ficus_, 3.
    sunt oblonga.

  The _Cherry_, 4.
  hangeth by a long start.
    _Cerasum_, 4.
    pendet longo _Pediolo_.

  The _Plumb_, 5.
  and _Peach_, 6.
  by a shorter.
    _Prunum_, 5.
    & _Persicum_, 6.
    breviori.

  The _Mulberry_, 7.
  by a very short one.
    _Morum_, 7.
    brevissimo.

  The _Wall-nut_, 8.
  the _Hazel-nut_, 9.
  and _Chest-nut_, 10.
  are wrapped in a _husk_
  and a _Shell_.
    _Nux Juglans_, 8.
    _Avellana_, 9.
    & _Castanea_, 10.
    involuta sunt _Cortici_
    & _Putamini_.

  Barren trees are 11.
  The _Firr_, the _Alder_,
  The _Birch_, the _Cypress_,
  The _Beech_, the _Ash_,
    Steriles arbores sunt 11.
    _Abies_, _Alnus_,
    _Betula_, _Cupressus_,
    _Fagus_, _Fraxinus_,
  The _Sallow_, the _Linden-tree_,
  &c., but most of them
  affording shade.
    _Salix_, _Tilia_,
    &c. sed pleræque
    umbriferæ.

  But the _Juniper_, 12.
  and _Bay-tree_, 13.
  yield _Berries_.
    At _Juniperus_, 12.
    & _Laurus_, 13.
    ferunt _Baccas_.

  The _Pine_, 14. _Pine-apples_.
    _Pinus_, 14. _Strobilos_.

  The _Oak_, 15.
  _Acorns_ and _Galls_.
    _Quercus_, 15.
    _Glandes_ & _Gallas_.




  XV.

  Flowers.
    Flores.

  [Illustration]


  Amongst the Flowers
  the most noted,
    Inter flores
    notissimi,

  In the beginning
  of the Spring are
  the _Violet_, 1. the _Crow-toes_, 2.
  the _Daffodil_, 3.
    Primo vere,
    _Viola_, 1. _Hyacinthus_, 2.
    _Narcissus_, 3.

  Then the _Lillies_, 4.
  white and yellow
  and blew, 5.
  and the _Rose_, 6. and the
  _Clove-gilliflowers_, 7. &c.
    Tum _Lilia_, 4.
    alba & lutea,
    & cœrulea, 5.
    tandem _Rosa_, 6. &
    _Caryophillum_, 7. &c.

  Of these _Garlands_, 8.
  and _Nosegays_, 9.
  are tyed round with twigs.
    Ex his _Serta_, 8.
    & _Serviæ_, 9.
    vientur.

  There are added also
  _sweet herbs_, 10.
  as _Marjoram_,
  _Flower gentle_, _Rue_,
  _Lavender_,
  _Rosemary_.
    Adduntur etiam
    _Herbæ odoratæ_, 10.
    ut _Amaracus_,
    _Amaranthus_, _Ruta_,
    _Lavendula_,
    _Rosmarinus_, (Libanotis).
  _Hysop_, _Spike_,
  _Basil_, _Sage_,
  _Mints_, &c.
    _Hypossus_, _Nard_,
    _Ocymum_, _Salvia_,
    _Menta_, &c.

  Amongst Field-flowers, 11.
  the most noted are
  the _May-lillie_,
  _Germander_, the _Blew-Bottle_,
  _Chamomel_, &c.
    Inter Campestres Flores, 11.
    notissimi sunt
    _Lilium Convallium_,
    _Chamædrys_, _Cyanus_,
    _Chamæmelum_, &c.

  And amongst Herbs,
  _Trefoil_.
  _Wormwood_, _Sorrel_,
  the _Nettle_, &c.
    Et Herbæ,
    _Cytisus_ (Trifolium)
    _Absinthium_, _Acetosa_,
    _Urtica_, &c.

  The _Tulip_, 12.
  is the grace of flowers,
  but affording no smell.
    _Tulipa_, 12.
    est decus Florum,
    sed expers odoris.




  XVI.

  Potherbs.
    Olera.

  [Illustration]


  _Pot-herbs_
  grow in Gardens,
  as _Lettice_, 1.
  _Colewort_, 2.
  _Onions_, 3. _Garlick_, 4.
  _Gourd_, 5.
    _Olera_
    nascuntur in hortis,
    ut _Lactuca_, 1.
    _Brassica_, 2.
    _Cepa_, 3. _Allium_, 4.
    _Cucurbita_, 5.
  The _Parsnep_, 6.
  The _Turnep_, 7.
  The _Radish_, 8.
  _Horse-radish_, 9.
    _Siser_, 6.
    _Rapa_, 7.
    _Raphanus minor_, 8.
    _Raphanus major_, 9.
  _Parsly_, 10.
  _Cucumbers_, 11.
  and _Pompions_, 12.
    _Petroselinum_, 10.
    _Cucumeres_, 11.
    _Pepones_, 12.




  XVII.

  Corn.
    Fruges.

  [Illustration]


  Some _Corn_ grows
  upon a _straw_,
  parted by _knots_,
    _Frumenta_ quædam crescunt
    super _culmum_,
    distinctum _geniculis_,
  as _Wheat_, 1.
  _Rie_, 2, _Barley_, 3.
  in which the _Ear_ hath _awnes_,
    ut, _Triticum_, 1.
    _Siligo_, 2. _Hordeum_, 3.
    in quibus _Spica_ habet _Aristas_,
  or else it is without awnes,
  and it nourisheth the _Corn_
  in the _Husk_.
    aut est mutica,
    fovetque _grana_
    in _gluma_.

  Some instead of an ear,
  have a _rizom_ (or plume)
  containing the corn
  by bunches,
  as _Oats_, 4. _Millet_, 5.
  _Turkey-wheat_, 6.
    Quædam pro Spica,
    habent _Paniculam_,
    continentem grana
    fasciatim,
    ut, _Avena_, 4. _Milium_, 5.
    _Frumentum Saracenicum_, 6.

  _Pulse_ have _Cods_,
  which enclose the corns
  in two _Shales_,
    _Legumina_ habent _Siliquas_,
    quæ includunt grana
    _valvulis_,
  as _Pease_, 7.
  _Beans_, 8. _Vetches_, 9. and
  those that are less than these
  _Lentils_ and _Urles_
  (or Tares).
    ut, _Pisum_, 7.
    _Fabæ_, 8. _Vicia_, 9. &
    minores his
    _Lentes_ & _Cicera_.




  XVIII.

  Shrubs.
    Frutices.

  [Illustration]


  A plant being greater,
  and harder than an herb,
  is called a _Shrub_:
  such as are
    Planta major
    & durior herba,
    dicitur _Frutex_:
    ut sunt

  In Banks and Ponds,
  the _Rush_, 1.
  the _Bulrush_, 2.
  or Cane without knots
    In ripis & stagnis,
    _Juncus_, 1.
    _Scirpus_, 2.
    [Canna] _enodis_
  bearing _Cats-tails_,
  and the _Reed_, 3.
  which is knotty and hollow
  within.
    ferens _Typhos_,
    & _Arundo_, 3.
    nodosa et cava
    intus.

  Elsewhere, 4. the _Rose_,
  the _Bastard-Corinths_,
  the _Elder_, the _Juniper_.
    Alibi, 4. _Rosa_,
    _Ribes_,
    _Sambucus_, _Juniperus_,

  Also the _Vine_, 5. which
  putteth forth _branches_, 6.
  and these _tendrels_, 7.
    Item _Vitis_, 5. quæ
    emittit _Palmites_, 6.
    et hi _Capreolos_, 7.
  _Vine-leaves_, 8.
  and Bunches of grapes, 9.
  on the stock whereof
  hang _Grapes_,
  which contain _Grape-stones_.
    _Pampinos_, 8.
    et _Racemos_, 9.
    quorum Scapo
    pendent _Uvæ_,
    continentes _Acinos_.




  XIX.

  Living-Creatures: and First, Birds.
    Animalia: & primum, Aves

  [Illustration]


  A _living Creature_ liveth,
  perceiveth, moveth it self;
  is born, dieth,
  is nourished, and groweth:
  standeth, or sitteth,
  or lieth, or goeth.
    _Animal_ vivit,
    sentit, movet se;
    nascitur, moritur,
    nutritur, & crescit;
    stat, aut sedet,
    aut cubat, aut graditur.

  A _Bird_,
  (here the King’s _Fisher_, 1.
  making her nest in the Sea.)
    _Avis_,
    (hic _Halcyon_, 1.
    in mari nidulans.)
  is covered with _Feathers_, 2.
  flyeth with _Wings_, 3.
  hath two _Pinions_, 4.
  as many _Feet_, 5.
  a _Tail_, 6.
  and a _Bill_, 7.
    tegitur _Plumis_, 2.
    volat _Pennis_, 3.
    habet duas _Alas_, 4.
    totidem _Pedes_, 5.
    _Caudam_, 6.
    & _Rostrum_, 7.

  The _Shee_, 8.
  _layeth_ Eggs, 10.
  in a nest, 9.
  and sitting upon them,
  hatcheth _young ones_, 11.
    _Fæmella_, 8.
    _ponit_ Ova, 10.
    in nido, 9.
    et incubans iis,
    excludit _Pullos_, 11.

  An _Egg_ is cover’d
  with a _Shell_, 12.
  under which is
  the _White_, 13.
  in this the _Yolk_, 14.
    _Ovum_ tegitur
    _testa_, 12.
    sub qua est
    _Albumen_, 13.
    in hoc _Vitellus_, 14.




  XX.

  Tame Fowls.
    Aves Domesticæ.

  [Illustration]


  The _Cock_, 1. (which
  croweth in the Morning.)
  hath a _Comb_, 2.
  and _Spurs_, 3.
    _Gallus_, 1. (qui
    cantat mane.)
    habet _Cristam_, 2.
    & _Calcaria_, 3.
  being gelded, he is called
  a _Capon_, and is crammed
  in a _Coop_, 4.
    castratus dicitur
    _Capo_ & saginatur
    in _Ornithotrophico_, 4.

  A _Hen_, 5.
  scrapeth the _Dunghil_,
  and picketh up Corns:
    _Gallina_, 5.
    ruspatur _fimetum_,
    & colligit grana:
  as also the _Pigeons_, 6.
  (which are brought up in
  a _Pigeon-house_, 7.)
  and the _Turkey-cock_, 8.
  with his _Turkey-hen_, 9.
    sicut & _Columbæ_, 6,
    (quæ educantur in
    _Columbario_, 7.)
    & _Gallopavus_, 8.
    cum sua _Meleagride_, 9.

  The gay _Peacock_, 10.
  prideth in his Feathers.
    Formosus _Pavo_, 10.
    superbit pennis.

  The _Stork_, 11.
  buildeth her nest
  on the top of the House.
    _Ciconia_, 11.
    nidificat
    in tecto.

  The _Swallow_, 12.
  the _Sparrow_, 13.
  the _Mag-pie_, 14.
  the _Jackdaw_, 15.
    _Hirundo_, 12.
    _Passer_, 13.
    _Pica_, 14.
    _Monedula_, 15.
  and the _Bat_, 16.
  (or Flettermouse)
  use to flie about Houses.
    & _Vespertilio_, 16.
    (Mus alatus)
    volitant circa Domus.




  XXI.

  Singing-Birds.
    Oscines.

  [Illustration]


  The _Nightingal_, 1.
  singeth the sweetlyest of all.
    _Luscinia_ (_Philomela_), 1.
    cantat suavissime omnium.

  The _Lark_, 2. singeth
  as she flyeth in the Air.
    _Alauda_, 2. cantillat
    volitans in aere;

  The _Quail_, 3.
  sitting on the ground;
    _Coturnix_, 3.
    sedens humi;

  others on the boughs of trees, 4.
  as the _Canary-bird_,
  the _Chaffinch_,
  the _Goldfinch_,
    Cæteræ, in ramis arborum, 4.
    ut _Luteola_ peregrina.
    _Fringilla_,
    _Carduelis_,
  the _Siskin_,
  the _Linnet_,
  the little _Titmouse_,
  the _Wood-wall_,
  the _Robin-red-breast_,
  the _Hedge-sparrow_, &c.
    _Acanthis_,
    _Linaria_,
    parvus _Parus_,
    _Galgulus_,
    _Rubecula_,
    _Curruca_, &c.

  The party colour’d _Parret_, 5.
  the _Black-bird_, 6.
  the _Stare_, 7.
  with the _Mag-pie_
  and the _Jay_, learn
  to frame men’s words.
    Discolor _Psittacus_, 5.
    _Merula_, 6.
    _Sturnus_, 7.
    cum _Pica_,
    & _Monedula_, discunt
    humanas voces formare

  A great many are wont
  to be shut in _Cages_, 8.
    Pleræque solent
    includi _Caveis_, 8.




  XXII.

  Birds that haunt the Fields and Woods.
    Aves Campestres & Sylvestres

  [Illustration]


  The _Ostrich_, 1.
  is the greatest Bird.
    _Struthio_, 1.
    ales est maximus.

  The _Wren_, 2.
  is the least.
    _Regulus_, 2.
    (Trochilus) minimus.

  The _Owl_, 3.
  is the most despicable.
    _Noctua_, 3.
    despicatissimus.

  The _Whoopoo_, 4.
  is the most nasty,
  for it eateth dung.
    _Upupa_, 4.
    sordidissimus,
    vescitur enim stercoribus.

  The _Bird of Paradise_, 5.
  is very rare.
    _Manucodiata_, 5.
    rarissimus.

  The _Pheasant_, 6.
  the _Bustard_, 7.
  the deaf wild _Peacock_, 8.
    _Phasianus_, 6.
    _Tarda_ (Otis), 7.
    surdus, _Tetrao_, 8.
  the _Moor-hen_, 9.
  the _Partrige_, 10.
  the _Woodcock_, 11.
  and the _Thrush_, 12.
  are counted Dainties.
    _Attagen_, 9.
    _Perdix_, 10.
    _Gallinago_ (Rusticola), 11.
    & _Turdus_, 12,
    habentur in deliciis.

  Among the rest,
  the best are,
  the watchful _Crane_, 13.
  the mournful _Turtle_, 14.
    Inter reliquas,
    potissimæ sunt,
    _Grus_ 13. pervigil.
    _Turtur_, 14. gemens.
  the _Cuckow_, 15.
  the _Stock-dove_,
  the _Speight_,
  the _Jay_,
  the _Crow_, &c., 16.
    _Cuculus_, 15.
    _Palumbes_,
    _Picus_,
    _Garrulus_,
    _Cornix_, &c., 16.




  XXIII.

  Ravenous Birds.
    Aves Rapaces.

  [Illustration]


  The _Eagle_, 1.
  the King of Birds
  looketh upon the Sun,
    _Aquila_, 1.
    Rex Avium,
    intuetur Solem.

  The _Vulture_, 2.
  and the _Raven_, 3.
  feed upon _Carrion_.
    _Vultur_, 2.
    & _Corvus_, 3.
    pascuntur _morticinis_,
    [cadaveribus.]

  The _Kite_, 4. pursueth
  Chickens.
    _Milvus_, 4. insectatur
    pullos gallinaceos.

  The _Falcon_, 5.
  the _Hobbie_, 6.
  and the _Hawk_, 7.
  catch at little Birds.
    _Falco_, 5,
    _Nisus_, 6.
    & _Accipiter_, 7.
    captant aviculas.

  The _Gerfalcon_, 8. catcheth
  Pigeons and greater Birds.
    _Astur_, 8. captat
    columbas & aves majores.




  XXIV.

  Water-Fowl.
    Aves Aquaticæ.

  [Illustration]


  The white _Swan_, 1.
  the _Goose_, 2.
  and the _Duck_, 3.
  swim up and down.
    _Oler_, 1. candidus,
    _Anser_, 2.
    & _Anas_, 3.
    natant.

  The _Cormorant_, 4.
  diveth.
    _Mergus_, 4.
    se mergit.

  Add to these the water-hen,
  and the _Pelican_, &c., 10.
    Adde his Fulicam,
    _Pelecanum_, &c., 10.

  The _Osprey_, 5.
  and the _Sea-mew_, 6.
  flying downwards
  use to catch Fish,
  but the _Heron_, 7.
  standing on the Banks.
    _Haliæetus_, 5.
    & _Gavia_, 6.
    devolantes,
    captant pisces,
    sed _Ardea_, 7.
    stans in ripis.

  The _Bittern_, 8. putteth
  his Bill in the water,
  and belloweth like an Ox.
    _Butio_, 8. inferit
    rostrum aquæ,
    & mugit ut bos.

  The _Water-wagtail_, 9.
  waggeth the tail.
    _Motacilla_, 9.
    motat caudam.




  XXV.

  Flying Vermin.
    Insecta volantia.

  [Illustration]


  The _Bee_, 1. maketh honey
  which the _Drone_, 2. devoureth.
    _Apis_, 1. facit mel
    quod _Fucus_, 2. depascit

  The _Wasp_, 3.
  and the _Hornet_, 4.
  molest with a sting;
    _Vespa_, 3.
    & _Crabro_, 4.
    infestant oculeo;
  and the _Gad-Bee_
  (or Breese), 5.
  especially _Cattel_;
  but the _Fly_, 6.
  and the _Gnat_, 7. us.
    & _Oestrum_
    (Asilus), 5.
    imprimis _pecus_.
    autem _Musca_, 6.
    & _Culex_, 7. nos.

  The _Cricket_, 8. singeth.
    _Gryllus_, 8. _cantillat_.

  The _Butterfly_, 9. is a
  winged _Caterpillar_.
    _Papillio_, 9. est
    alata _Eruca_.

  The _Beetle_, 10. covereth
  her wings with _Cases_.
    _Scarabæus_, 10. tegit
    alas _vaginis_.

  The _Glow-worm_, 11.
  shineth by night.
    _Cicindela_ [Lampyris], 11.
    nitet noctu.




  XXVI.

  Four-Footed Beasts: and First those about the House.
    Quadrupeda: & primum Domestica.

  [Illustration]


  The _Dog_, 1.
  with the _Whelp_, 2.
  is keeper of the House.
    _Canis_, 1.
    cum _Catello_, 2.
    est custos Domûs.

  The _Cat_, 3.
  riddeth the House
  of _Mice_, 4.
  which also
  a _Mouse-trap_, 5. doth.
    _Felis_ (Catus) 3.
    purgat domum
    à _Muribus_, 4.
    quod etiam
    _Muscipula_, 5. facit.

  A _Squirrel_, 6.
  The _Ape_, 7.
  and the _Monkey_, 8.
  are kept at home
  for delight.
    _Sciurus_, 6.
    _Simia_, 7.
    & _Cercopithecus_, 8.
    habentur domi
    delectamento.

  The _Dormouse_, 9. and
  other greater Mice, 10.
  as, the _Weesel_, the _Marten_,
  and the _Ferret_,
  trouble the House,
    _Glis_, 9. &
    cæteri Mures majores, 10.
    ut, _Mustela_, _Martes_,
    _Viverra_,
    infestant domum.




  XXVII.

  Herd-Cattle.
    Pecora.

  [Illustration]


  The _Bull_, 1. the _Cow_, 2.
  and the _Calf_, 3.
  are covered with hair.
    _Taurus_, 1. _Vacca_, 2.
    & _Vitulus_, 3.
    teguntur pilis.

  The _Ram_, the _Weather_, 4.
  the _Ewe_, 5. and the _Lamb_, 6.
  bear wool.
    _Aries_, _Vervex_, 4.
    _Ovis_, 5. cum _Agno_, 6.
    gestant lanam.

  The _He-goat_, the _Gelt-goat_, 7.
  with the _She-goat_, 8.
  and _Kid_, 9. have
  _shag-hair_ and _beards_.
    _Hircus_, _Caper_, 7.
    cum _Capra_, 8.
    & _Hædo_, 9. habent.
    _Villos_ & _aruncos_.

  The _Hog_, the _Sow_, 10.
  and the _Pigs_, 11.
  have _bristles_,
  but not _horns_;
  but also _cloven feet_
  as those others (have.)
    _Porcus_, _Scrofa_, 10.
    cum _Porcellis_, 11.
    habent _Setas_,
    at non _Cornua_;
    sed etiam _Ungulas bisulcas_
    ut illa.




  XXVIII.

  Labouring-Beasts.
    Jumenta.

  [Illustration]


  The _Ass_, 1.
  and the _Mule_, 2.
  carry burthens.
    _Asinus_, 1.
    & _Mulus_, 2.
    gestant Onera.

  The _Horse_, 3.
  (which a _Mane_, 4. graceth)
  carryeth us.
    _Equus_, 3.
    (quam _Juba_, 4. ornat)
    gestat nos ipsos.

  The _Camel_, 5.
  carryeth the Merchant
  with his Ware.
    _Camelus_, 5.
    gestat Mercatorem
    cum mercibus suis.

  The _Elephant_, 6.
  draweth his meat to him
  with his _Trunk_, 7.
    _Elephas_, (Barrus) 6.
    attrahit pabulum
    _Proboscide_, 7.

  He hath two _Teeth_, 8.
  standing out,
  and is able to carry
  full thirty men.
    Habet duos _dentes_, 8.
    prominentes,
    & potest portare
    etiam triginta viros.




  XXIX.

  Wild-Cattle.
    Feræ Pecudes.

  [Illustration]


  The _Buff_, 1.
  and the _Buffal_, 2.
  are wild Bulls.
    _Urus_, 1.
    & _Bubalus_, 2.
    sunt feri Boves.

  The _Elke_, 3.
  being bigger than an Horse
  (whose back is impenetrable)
  hath knaggy horns
  as also the _Hart_, 4.
    _Alces_, 3.
    major equo
    (cujus tergus est impenetrabilis)
    habet ramosa cornua:
    ut & _Cervus_, 4.

  but the _Roe_, 5. and
  the _Hind-calf_, almost none.
    Sed _Caprea_, 5. cum
    _Hinnulo_, ferè nulla.

  The _Stone-back_, 6.
  huge great ones.
    _Capricornus_, 6.
    prægrandia;

  The _Wild-goat_, 7.
  hath very little ones,
  by which she hangeth
  her self on a Rock.
    _Rupicapra_, 7.
    minuta,
    quibus suspendit
    se ad rupem.

  The _Unicorn_, 8.
  hath but one,
  but that a precious one.
    _Monoceros_, 8.
    habet unum,
    sed pretiosum.

  The _Boar_, 9.
  assaileth one with his tushes.
    _Aper_, 9.
    grassatur dentibus.

  The _Hare_, 10. is fearful.
    _Lepus_, 10. pavet.

  The _Cony_, 11.
  diggeth the Earth.
    _Cuniculus_, 11.
    perfodit terram;

  As also the _Mole_, 12.
  which maketh hillocks.
    Ut & _Talpa_, 12.
    quæ facit grumos.




  XXX.

  Wild-Beasts.
    Feræ Bestiæ.

  [Illustration]


  _Wild Beasts_ have
  sharp paws, and teeth,
  and are flesh eaters.
    _Bestiæ_ habent
    acutos ungues, & dentes,
    suntque carnivoræ,

  As the _Lyon_, 1.
  the King of four-footed Beasts,
  having a mane;
  with the _Lioness_.
    Ut _Leo_, 1.
    Rex quadrupedum,
    jubatus;
    cum _Leænâ_.

  The spotted _Panther_, 2.
    Maculosus, _Pardo_ (Panthera) 2.

  The _Tyger_, 3.
  the cruellest of all.
    _Tygris_, 3.
    immanissima omnium.

  The Shaggy _Bear_, 4.
    Villosus _Ursus_, 4.

  The ravenous _Wolf_, 5.
    Rapax _Lupus_, 5.

  The quick sighted _Ounce_, 6.
    _Lynx_, 6. visu pollens,

  The tayled _fox_, 7.
  the craftiest of all.
    Caudata _Vulpes_, 7.
    astutissima _omnium_.

  The _Hedge-hog_, 8.
  is prickly.
    _Erinaceus_, 8.
    est aculeatus.

  The _Badger_, 9.
  delighteth in holes.
    _Melis_, 9.
    gaudet latebris.




  XXXI.

  Serpents and Creeping things.
    Serpentes & Reptilia.

  [Illustration]


  _Snakes_ creep
  by winding themselves;
    _Angues_ repunt
    sinuando se;

  The _Adder_, 1.
  in the wood;
    _Coluber_, 1.
    in Sylvâ;

  The _Water-snake_, 2.
  in the water;
    _Natrix_, (hydra) 2.
    in Aquâ;

  The _Viper_, 3.
  amongst great stones.
    _Vipera_, 3.
    in saxis;

  The _Asp_, 4. in the fields.
    _Aspis_, 4, in campis.

  The _Boa_, (or Mild-snake) 5.
  in Houses.
    _Boa_, 5.
    in Domibus.

  The _Slow-worm_, 6.
  is blind.
    _Cæcilia_, 6.
    est cœca.

  The _Lizzard_, 7.
  and the _Salamander_, 8.
  (that liveth long in fire)
  have feet.
    _Lacerta_, 7.
    _Salamandra_, 8.
    (in igne vivax,)
    habent pedes.

  The _Dragon_, 9.
  _a winged Serpent_,
  killeth with his Breath.
    _Draco_, 9.
    _Serpens alatus_,
    necat halitu.

  The _Basilisk_, 10.
  with his Eyes;
    _Basiliscus_, 10.
    Oculis;

  And the _Scorpion_, 11.
  with his poysonous tail.
    _Scorpio_, 11.
    venenatâ caudâ.




  XXXII.

  Crawling-Vermin.
    Insecta repentia.

  [Illustration]


  _Worms_ gnaw _things_.
    _Vermes_, rodunt _res_.

  The _Earth-worm_, 1.
  the Earth.
    _Lumbricus_, 1.
    terram.

  The _Caterpillar_, 2.
  the Plant.
    _Eruca_, 2.
    plantam.

  The _Grashopper_, 3.
  the Fruits.
    _Cicada_, 3.
    Fruges.

  The _Mite_, 4. the Corn.
    _Circulio_, 4. Frumenta.

  The _Timber-worm_, 5.
  Wood.
    _Teredo_, (cossis) 5.
    Ligna.

  The _Moth_, 6. a garment.
    _Tinea_, 6. vestem.

  The _Book-worm_, 7.
  a Book.
    _Blatta_, 7.
    Librum.

  _Maggots_, 8.
  Flesh and Cheese.
    _Termites_, 8.
    carnem & caseum.

  _Hand-worms_, the Hair.
    _Acari_, Capillum.

  The skipping _Flea_, 9.
  the _Lowse_, 10.
  and the stinking _Wall-louse_, 11.
  bite us.
    Saltans _Pulex_, 9.
    _Pediculus_, 10.
    fœtans _Cimex_, 11.
    mordent nos.

  The _Tike_, 12.
  is a blood-sucker.
    _Ricinus_, 12.
    sanguisugus est.

  The _Silk-worm_, 13.
  maketh silk.
    _Bombyx_, 13.
    facit sericum.

  The _Pismire_, 14.
  is painful.
    _Formica_, 14.
    est laboriosa.

  The _Spider_, 15.
  weaveth a Cobweb,
  nets for flies.
    _Aranea_, 15.
    texit Araneum,
    retia muscis.

  The _Snail_, 16.
  carrieth about her Snail-horn.
    _Cochlea_, 16.
    circumfert testam.




  XXXIII.

  Creatures that live as well by Water as by Land.
    Amphibia.

  [Illustration]


  Creatures that live
  by land and by water, are
    Viventia
    in terrâ & aquâ, sunt

  The _Crocodile_, 1.
  a cruel and preying Beast
  of the River _Nilus_;
    _Crocodilus_, 1.
    immanis & prædatrix bestia
    _Nili_ fluminis;

  The _Castor_ or _Beaver_, 2.
  having feet like a Goose,
  and a scaly tail to swim.
    _Castor_, (Fiber) 2.
    habens pedes anserinos
    & squameam Caudam
    ad natandum.

  The _Otter_, 3.
    _Lutra_, 3.

  The croaking _Frog_, 4.
  with the _Toad_.
    & coaxans _Rana_, 4.
    cum _Bufone_.

  The _Tortoise_, 5.
  covered above and beneath
  with shells,
  as with a target.
    _Testudo_, 5.
    Operta & infra,
    testis,
    ceu scuto.




  XXXIV.

  River Fish and Pond Fish.
    Pisces Fluviatiles & Lacustres.

  [Illustration]


  A _Fish_ hath _Fins_, 1.
  with which it swimmeth,
  and _Gills_, 2.
  by which it taketh breath,
    _Piscis_ habet _Pinnas_, 1.
    quibus natat;
    & _Branchias_, 2.
    quibus respirat;
  and _Prickles_
  instead of bones: besides
  the _Male_ hath a _Milt_,
  and the _Female_ a _Row_.
    & _Spinas_
    loco ossium: præterea,
    _Mas Lactes_,
    _Fœmina Ova_.

  Some have _Scales_.
  as the _Carp_, 3.
  and the _Luce_ or _Pike_, 4.
    Quidam habent _Squamas_,
    ut _Carpio_, 3.
    _Lucius_, (Lupus) 4.

  Some are sleek
  as the _Eel_, 5.
  and the _Lamprey_, 6.
    Alii sunt glabri,
    ut, _Anguilla_, 5.
    _Mustela_, 6.

  The _Sturgeon_, 7.
  having a sharp snout,
  groweth beyond
  the length of a Man.
    _Accipenser_ (Sturio), 7.
    mucronatus,
    crescit ultra
    longitudinem viri.

  The _Sheath-fish_, 8.
  having wide Cheeks,
  is bigger than he:
    _Silurus_, 8.
    bucculentus,
    major illo est:

  But the greatest,
  is the _Huson_, 9.
    Sed maximus
    _Antaseus_ (Huso,) 9.

  _Minews_, 10.
  swimming by shoals,
  are the least.
    _Apuæ_, 10.
    natantes gregatim,
    sunt minutissimæ.

  Others of this sort are
  the _Perch_, the _Bley_,
  the _Barbel_,
    Alii hujus generis sunt
    _Perca_, _Alburnus_,
    _Mullus_, (Barbus)
  the _Esch_, the _Trout_,
  the _Gudgeon_,
  and _Trench_, 11.
    _Thymallus_, _Trutta_,
    _Gobius_,
    _Tinca_, 11.

  The _Crab-fish_, 12.
  is covered with a shell,
  and it hath _Claws_, and crawleth
  forwards and backwards.
    _Cancer_, 12.
    tegitur crusta,
    habetque _chelas_, & graditur
    porro & retrò.

  The _Horse-leech_, 13.
  sucketh blood.
    _Hirudo_, 13.
    sugit sanguinem.




  XXXV.

  Sea-fish, and Shell-fish.
    Marini pisces & Conchæ.

  [Illustration]


  The _Whale_, 1. is the
  greatest of the Sea-fish.
    _Balæna_, (Cetus) 1.
    maximus Piscium marinorum.

  The _Dolphin_, 2.
  the swiftest.
    _Delphinus_, 2.
    velocissimus.

  The _Scate_, 3.
  the most monstrous.
    _Raia_, 3.
    monstrosissimus.

  Others are the _Lamprel_, 4.
  the _Salmon_, or the _Lax_, 5.
    Alii sunt _Murænula_, 4.
    _Salmo_, (Esox) 5.

  There are also fish that flie, 6.
    Dantur etiam volatiles, 6.

  Add _Herrings_, 7.
  which are brought pickled,
  and _Place_, 8. and _Cods_, 9.
  which are brought dry;
    Adde _Haleces_, 7.
    qui salsi,
    & _Passeres_, 8. cum _Asellis_, 9.
    qui adferuntur arefacti;
  and the Sea monsters,
  the _Seal_. 10.
  and the _Sea-horse_, &c.
    & monstra marina,
    _Phocam_, 10.
    _Hippopotamum_, &c.

  _Shell-fish_, 11. have Shells.
    _Concha_, 11. habet testas,

  The _Oyster_, 12.
  affordeth sweet meat.
    _Ostrea_, 12.
    dat sapidam carnem.

  The _Purple-fish_, 13.
  purple;
    _Murex_, 13.
    purpuram;

  The others, Pearls, 14.
    _Alii_, 14. Margaritas.




  XXXVI.

  Man.
    Homo.

  [Illustration]


  _Adam_, 1. the first Man,
  was made by God
  after his own Image
  the sixth day of the Creation,
  of a lump of Earth.
    _Adamus_, 1. primus Homo,
    formatus est a Deo
    ad Imaginem suam
    sextâ die Creationis,
    e Gleba Terræ.

  And _Eve_, 2.
  the first Woman, was made
  of the Rib of the Man.
    Et _Eva_, 2.
    prima mulier, formata est
    e costâ viri.

  These, being tempted
  by the _Devil_ under
  the shape of a _Serpent_, 3.
  when they had eaten of
  the fruit of the _forbidden Tree_, 4.
    Hi, seducti
    à _Diabolo_ sub
    specie _Serpentis_, 3.
    cum comederent de
    fructu _vetitæ arboris_, 4.
  were condemned, 5.
  to misery and death,
  with all their posterity,
  and cast out of _Paradise_, 6.
    damnati sunt, 5.
    ad miseriam & mortem,
    cum omni posteritate sua,
    & ejecti e _Paradiso_ 6.




  XXXVII.

  The Seven Ages of Man.
    Septem Ætates Hominis.

  [Illustration]


  A _Man_ is first an _Infant_, 1.
  then a _Boy_, 2.
  then a _Youth_, 3.
  then a _Young-man_, 4.
    inde _Juvenis_, 4.
    _Homo_ est primum _Infans,_ 1.
    deinde _Puer_, 2.
    tum _Adolescens_, 3.
  then a _Man_, 5.
  after that an _Elderly-man_, 6.
  and at last, a _decrepid old man_, 7.
    posteà _Vir_, 5.
    dehinc _Senex_, 6.
    tandem _Silicernium_, 7.

  So also in the other _Sex_,
  there are, a _Girl_, 8.
  A _Damosel_, 9. a _Maid_, 10.
    Sic etiam in altero _Sexu_,
    sunt, _Pupa_, 8.
    _Puella_, 9. _Virgo_, 10.
  A _Woman_, 11.
  an _elderly Woman_, 12. and
  a _decrepid old Woman_, 13.
    _Mulier_, 11.
    _Vetula_, 12.
    _Anus decrepita_, 13.




  XXXVIII.

  The Outward Parts of a Man.
    Membra Hominis Externa.

  [Illustration]


  The _Head_, 1. is above,
  the _Feet_, 20. below.
    _Caput_, 1. est supra,
    infra _Pedes_, 20.
  the fore part of the Neck
  (which ends at
  the _Arm-holes_, 2.)
  is the _Throat_, 3.
  the hinder part, the _Crag_, 4.
    Anterior pars Colli
    (quod desit
    in _Axillas_, 2.)
    est _Jugulum_, 3.
    posterior _Cervix_, 4.

  The _Breast_, 5, is before;
  the _back_, 6, behind;
  Women have in it
  two _Dugs_, 7.
  with _Nipples_,
    _Pectus_, 5. est ante;
    _Dorsum_, 6. retro;
    Fœeminis sunt in illo
    binæ _Mammæ_, 7.
    cum _Papillis_.

  Under the Breast
  is the _Belly_, 9.
  in the middle of it
  the _Navel_, 10.
  underneath the _Groyn_, 11.
  and the _privities_.
    Sub pectore
    est _Venter_, 9.
    in ejus medio,
    _Umbelicus_, 10.
    subtus _Inguen_, 11.
    & _pudenda_.

  The _Shoulder-blades_, 12.
  are behind the back,
  on which the _Shoulders_
  depend, 13.
    _Scapulæ_, 12.
    sunt a tergo,
    â quibus pendent
    _humeri_, 13.
  on these the _Arms_, 14.
  with the _Elbow_, 15. and then
  on either side the _Hands_,
  the _right_, 8. and the _left_, 16.
    ab his _Brachia_, 14.
    cum _Cubito_, 15. inde
    ad utrumque Latus, _Manus_,
    _Dextera_, 8. & _Sinistra_, 16.

  The _Loyns_
  are next the Shoulders,
  with the _Hips_, 18.
  and in the _Breech_,
  the _Buttocks_, 19.
    _Lumbi_, 17.
    excipiunt Humeros,
    cum _Coxis_, 18.
    & _in Podice_, (culo)
    _Nates_, 19.

  These make the _Foot_;
  the _Thigh_, 21. then the _Leg_, 23.
  (the _Knee_,
  being betwixt them, 22.)
    Absolvunt Pedem;
    _Femur_, 21. tum _Crus_, 23.
    _(Genu_, 22. intermedio.)
  in which is the _Calf_, 24.
  with the _Shin_, 25.
  then the _Ankles_, 26.
    in quo _Sura_, 24.
    cum _Tilia_, 25.
    abhinc _Tali_, 26.
  the _Heel_, 27.
  and the _Sole_, 28.
  in the very end,
  the great _Toe_, 29.
  with four (other) _Toes_.
    _Calx_, (Calcaneum) 27.
    & _Solum_, 28.
    in extremo
    _Hallux_, 29.
    cum quatuor _Digitis_.




  XXXIX.

  The Head and the Hand.
    Caput & Manus.

  [Illustration]


  In the _Head_ are
  the _Hair_, 1.
  (which is combed
  with a _Comb_, 2.)
  two _Ears_, 3.
  the _Temples_, 4.
  and the _Face_, 5.
    In _Capite_ sunt
    _Capillus_, 1.
    (qui pectitur
    _Pectine_, 2.)
    _Aures_, 3. binæ,
    & _Tempora_, 4.
    _Facies_, 5.

  In the Face are
  the _Fore-head_, 6.
  both the _Eyes_, 7.
  the _Nose_, 8.
  (with two _Nostrils_)
    In facie sunt
    _Frons_, 6.
    _Oculus_, 7.
    uterque, _Nasus_, 8.
    (cum duabus _Naribus_)
  the _Mouth_, 9.
  the _Cheeks_, 10.
  and the _Chin_, 13.
    _Os_, 9.
    _Genæ_, (Malæ) 10.
    & _Mentum_, 13.

  The _Mouth_ is fenced
  with a _Mustacho_, 11.
  and _Lips_, 12.
  A _Tongue_ and a _Palate_,
  and _Teeth_, 16.
  in the _Cheek-bone_.
    Os septum est
    _Mystace_, 11.
    & _Labiis_, 12.
    _Lingua_ cum _Palato_,
    _Dentibus_, 16.
    in _Maxilla_.

  A Man’s Chin
  is covered with a _Beard_, 14.
    Mentum virile
    tegitur _Barba_, 14.
  and the Eye
  (in which is the _White_
  and the _Apple_)
  with _eye-lids_,
  and an _eye-brow_, 15.
    Oculos vero
    (in quo _Albugo_
    & _Pupilla_)
    _palpæbris_,
    & _supercilio_, 15.

  The _Hand_ being closed
  is a _Fist_, 17.
  being open is a _Palm_, 18.
  in the midst, is the _hollow_, 19.
  of the Hand.
    _Manus_ contracta,
    _Pugnus_, 17.
    est aperta, _Palma_, 18.
    in medio _Vola_, 19.
  the extremity is
  the _Thumb_, 20.
  with four _Fingers_,
  the _Fore-finger_, 21.
  the _Middle-finger_, 22.
  the _Ring-finger_, 23.
  and the _Little-finger_, 24.
    extremitas,
    _Pollex_, 20.
    cum quatuor _Digitis_,
    _Indice_, 21.
    _Medio_, 22.
    _Annulari_, 23.
    & _Auriculari_, 24.

  In every one are
  three _joynts_, a. b. c.
  and as many _knuckles_, d. e. f.
  with a _Nail_, 25.
    In quolibet sunt
    _articuli_ tres, a. b. c.
    & totidem _Condyli_, d. e. f.
    cum _Ungue_, 25.




  XL.

  The Flesh and Bowels.
    Caro & Viscera.

  [Illustration]


  In the _Body_ are the _Skin_
  with the _Membranes_,
  the _Flesh_ with the _Muscles_,
    In _Corpore_ sunt _Cutis_
    cum _Membranis_,
    _Caro_ cum _Musculis_,
  the _Chanels_,
  the _Gristles_,
  the _Bones_ and the _Bowels_.
    _Canales_,
    _Cartilagines_,
    _Ossa_ & _Viscera_.

  The _Skin_, 1. being pull’d off,
  the _Flesh_, 2. appeareth,
  not in a continual lump,
  but being distributed,
  as it were in stuft puddings,
    _Cute_, 1. detractâ,
    _Caro_, 2. apparet,
    non continuâ massâ,
    sed distributa,
    tanquam in farcimina,
  which they call _Muscles_,
  whereof there are reckoned
  four hundred and five,
  being the Chanels of the _Spirits_,
  to move the _Members_.
    quos vocant _Musculos_,
    quorum numerantur
    _quadringenti quinque_,
    canales _Spirituum_,
    ad movendum _Membra_.

  The _Bowels_ are
  the inward _Members_:
    _Viscera_ sunt
    _Membra_ interna:

  As in the Head,
  the _Brains_, 3.
  being compassed about
  with a _Skull_, and
  the _Skin_ which covereth the _Skull_.
    Ut in Capite,
    _Cerebrum_, 3.
    circumdatum
    _Cranio_, &
    _Pericranio_.

  In the Breast, the _Heart_, 4.
  covered with
  a thin _Skin_ about it,
  and the _Lungs_, 5.
  breathing to and fro.
    In Pectore, _Cor_, 4.
    obvolutum
    _Pericardio_,
    & _Pulmo_, 5.
    respirans.

  In the _Belly_,
  the _Stomach_, 6.
  and the _Guts_, 7.
  covered with a _Caul_.
    In _Ventre_,
    _Ventriculus_, 6.
    & _Intestina_, 7.
    obducta _Omento_.
  The _Liver_, 8.
  and in the left side opposite
  against it, the _Milt_, 9.
  the two _Kidneys_, 10.
  and the _Bladder_, 11.
    _Jecur_, (Hepar) 8.
    & à sinistro oppositus
    ei _Lien_, 9.
    duo _Renes_, 10.
    cum _Vesica_, 11.

  The Breast
  is divided from the Belly
  by a thick Membrane,
  which is called
  the _Mid-riff_, 12.
    Pectus
    dividitur à Ventre
    crassâ Membranâ,
    quæ vocatur
    _Diaphragma_, 12.




  XLI.

  The Chanels and Bones.
    Canales & Ossa.

  [Illustration]


  The Chanels of the Body are
  the _Veins_, carrying
  the Blood from the Liver;
    Canales Corporis sunt
    _Venæ_ deferentes
    Sanguinem ex Hepate;

  The _Arteries_ (carrying)
  _Heart_ and _Life_ from the
  _Heat_;
    _Arteriæ_, _Calorem_
    & _Vitam_ è _Corde_;

  The _Nerves_ (carrying)
  Sense and Motion
  throughout the Body from
  the _Brain_.
    _Nervi_,
    Sensum et Motum,
    per Corpus a
    _Cerebro_.

  You shall find these three, 1.
  everywhere joined together.
    Invenies hæc tria, 1.
    ubique sociata.

  Besides, from the Mouth
  into the Stomach is
  the _Gullet_, 2. the
  way of the meat and drink;
    Porrò, ab Ore
    in Ventriculum
    _Gula_, 2.
    via cibi ac potus;
  and by it to the Lights, the
  _Wezand_, 5. for breathing;
    & juxta hanc, ad Pulmonem
    _Guttur_, 5. pro respiratione;
  from the Stomach to the Anus
  is a great _Intestine_, 3.
  to purge out the _Ordure_;
    à ventriculo ad Anum
    _Colon_, 3.
    ad excernendum _Stercus_;
  from the Liver to the
  Bladder, the _Ureter_, 4.
  for making water.
    ab Hepate ad
    Vesicam, _Ureter_, 4.
    reddendæ urinæ.

  The _Bones_ are
  in the Head, the _Skull_, 6.
  the two _Cheek-bones_, 7.
  with thirty-two _Teeth_, 8.
    _Ossa_ sunt
    in Capite, _Calvaria_, 6.
    duæ _Maxillæ_, 7.
    cum XXXII. _Dentibus_, 8.

  Then the _Back-bone_, 9.
  the Pillar of the Body,
  consisting of thirty-four
  turning _Joints_, that
  the Body may bend it self.
    Tum, _Spina dorsi_, 9.
    columna Corporis,
    constans ex XXXIV.
    _Vertebris_, ut
    Corpus queat flectere se

  The _Ribs_, 10. whereof
  there are twenty-four.
    _Costæ_, 10. quarum
    viginti quatuor.

  The _Breast-bone_, 11.
  the two _Shoulder-blades_, 12.
  the _Buttock-bone_, 13.
  the _bigger Bone_
  in the Arm, 15. and
  the _lesser Bone_ in the Arm.
    _Os Pectoris_, 11.
    duæ _Scapulæ_, 12.
    _Os sessibuli_, 13.
    _Lacerti_, 15. &
    _Ulna_.

  The _Thigh-bone_, 14.
  the foremost, 16.
  and the hindmost Bone,
  in the Leg, 17.
    _Tibia_, 14.
    _Fibula_, 16. anterior,
    & posterior, 17.

  The Bones of the Hand, 18.
  are thirty-four, and
  of the Foot, 19. thirty.
    Ossa Manûs, 18.
    sunt triginta quatuor,
    Pedis, 19. triginta.

  The _Marrow_ is in
  the Bones.
    _Medulla_ est in Ossibus,




  XLII.

  The Outward and Inward Senses.
    Sensus externi & interni.

  [Illustration]


  There are five outward
  _Senses_;
    Sunt quinque externi
    _Sensus_;

  The _Eye_, 1. seeth Colours,
  what is white or black,
  green or blew,
  red or yellow.
    _Oculus_, 1. videt _Colores_,
    quid album vel atrum,
    viride vel cœruleum,
    rubrum aut luteum, sit.

  The _Ear_, 2. heareth
  _Sounds_, both natural,
  Voices and Words;
  and artificial,
  Musical Tunes.
    _Auris_, 2. audit
    _Sonos_, tum naturales,
    Voces & Verba;
    tum artificiales,
    Tonos Musicos.

  The _Nose_, 3. scenteth
  smells and stinks.
    _Nasus_, 3, _olfacit_
    odores & fœtores.

  The _Tongue_, 4.
  with the roof of the Mouth
  tastes _Savours_,
  what is sweet or bitter,
  keen or biting,
  sower or harsh.
    _Lingua_, 4.
    cum Palato
    gustat _Sapores_,
    quid dulce aut amarum,
    acre aut acidum,
    acerbum aut austerum.

  The _Hand_, 5. by touching
  discerneth the quantity
  and quality of things;
    _Manus_, 5. tangendo
    dignoscit quantitatem,
    & qualitatem rerum;
  the hot and cold,
  the moist and dry,
  the hard and soft,
  the smooth and rough,
  the heavy and light.
    calidum & frigidum,
    humidum & siccum,
    durum & molle,
    læve & asperum,
    grave & leve.

  The inward _Senses_ are
  three.
    _Sensus_ interni sunt tres.

  The _Common Sense_, 7.
  under the _forepart of the_
  _head_, apprehendeth
  things taken from
  the outward Senses.
    _Sensus Communis_, 7.
    sub _sincipite_
    apprehendit
    res perceptas a
    Sensibus externis.

  The _Phantasie_, 6.
  under the _crown of the head_
  judgeth of those things,
  thinketh and dreameth,
    _Phantasia_, 6.
    sub _vertice_,
    dijudicat res istas,
    cogitat, somniat.

  The _Memory_, 8.
  under the _hinder part of the_
  _head_, layeth up every thing
  and fetcheth them out:
  it loseth some,
  and this is _forgetfulness_.
    _Memoria_, 8.
    sub _occipitio_,
    recondit singula
    & depromit:
    deperdit quædam,
    & hoc est _oblivio_.

  _Sleep_, is
  the rest of the Senses.
    _Somnus_, est
    requies Sensuum.




  XLIII.

  The Soul of Man.
    Anima hominis.

  [Illustration]


  The _Soul_ is the Life
  of the Body, one in the whole.
    _Anima_ est vita
    corporis, una in toto.

  Only _Vegetative_ in _Plants_;
    Tantùm _Vegetativa_ in
    _Plantis_;

  Withal _Sensitive_ in
  _Animals_;
    Simul _Sensitiva_ in
    _Animalibus_;

  And also rational in
  _Men_.
    Etiam _Rationalis_ in
    _Homine_.

  This consisteth in three
  things;
    Hæc consistet in tribus:

  In the _Understanding_,
  whereby it judgeth
  and understandeth
  a thing good and evil,
  or true, or apparent.
    In _Mente_ (Intellectu)
    quâ cognoscit,
    & intelligit,
    bonum ac malum,
    vel verum, vel apparens.

  In the _Will_,
  whereby it chooseth,
  and desireth,
  or rejecteth, and
  misliketh a thing known.
    In _Voluntate_,
    quâ eligit,
    & concupiscit,
    aut rejicit, &
    aversatur cognitum.

  In the _Mind_,
  whereby it pursueth
  the Good chosen or
  avoideth the Evil rejected.
    In _Animo_,
    quo prosequitur
    Bonum electum, vel
    fugit Malum rejectum.

  Hence is _Hope_ and _Fear_
  in the desire,
  and dislike.
    Hinc _Spes_ & _Timor_,
    in cupidine,
    & aversatione:

  Hence is _Love_ and _Joy_,
  in the Fruition:
    Hinc _Amor_ & _Gaudium_,
    in fruitione:

  But _Anger_ and _Grief_,
  in suffering.
    Sed _Ira_ ac _Dolor_,
    in passione.

  The true judgment of a
  thing is _Knowledge_;
  the false, is _Error_,
  _Opinion_ and _Suspicion_.
    Vera cognitio
    rei, est _Scientia_;
    falsa, _Error_,
    _Opinio_, _Suspicio_.




  XLIV.

  Deformed and Monstrous People.
    Deformes & Monstrosi.

  [Illustration]


  _Monstrous_ and
  _deformed_ People are those
  which differ in the Body
  from the ordinary shape,
    _Monstrosi_, &
    _deformes_ sunt
    abeuntes corpore
    à communi formâ,
  as the huge _Gyant_, 1.
  the little _Dwarf_, 2.
  One with _two Bodies_, 3.
  One with _two Heads_, 4.
  and such like Monsters.
    ut sunt, immanis _Gigas_,
    nanus (_Pumilio_), 2.
    _Bicorpor_, 3.
    _Biceps_, 4.
    & id genus monstra.

  Amongst these are reckoned,
  The _jolt-headed_, 5.
  The great _nosed_, 6.
  The _blubber-lipped_, 7.
    His accensentur,
    _Capito_, 5.
    _Naso_, 6.
    _Labeo_, 7.
  The _blub-cheeked_, 8.
  The _goggle-eyed_, 9.
  The _wry-necked_, 10.
  The _great-throated_, 11.
    _Bucco_, 8.
    _Strabo_, 9.
    _Obstipus_, 10.
    _Strumosus_, 11.
  The _Crump-backed_, 12.
  The _Crump-footed_, 13.
  The _steeple-crowned_, 15.
  add to these
  The _Bald-pated_, 14.
    _Gibbosus_, 12.
    _Loripes_, 13.
    _Cilo_, 15.
    adde
    _Calvastrum_, 14.




  XLV.

  The Dressing of Gardens.
    Hortorum cultura.

  [Illustration]


  We have seen Man:
  Now let us go on to
  Man’s _living_, and to
  _Handy-craft-Trades_,
  which tend to it.
    Vidimus hominem:
    Jam pergamus ad
    _Victum_ hominis, & ad
    _Artes Mechanicas_,
    quæ huc faciunt.

  The first and most ancient
  _sustenance_, were the
  _Fruits of the Earth_.
    Primus & antiquissimus
    _Victus_, erant
    _Fruges Terræ_.

  Hereupon the first
  labour of Adam, was
  _the dressing of a garden_.
    Hinc primus
    Labor Adami,
    _Horti cultura_.

  The _Gardener_, 1.
  diggeth in a _Garden-plot_,
  with a _Spade_, 2.
  or _Mattock_, 3.
    _Hortulanus_ (Olitor), 1.
    fodit in _Viridario_,
    _Ligone_, 2.
    aut _Bipalio_, 3.
  and maketh _Beds_, 4.
  and places wherein to plant _Trees_, 5.
  on which he setteth
  _Seeds_ and _Plants_.
    facitque _Pulvinos_, 4.
    ac _Plantaria_, 5.
    quibus inserit
    _Semina_ & _Plantas_.

  The _Tree-Gardener_, 6.
  planteth Trees, 7.
  in an _Orchard_,
  and grafteth _Cyons_, 8.
  in _Stocks_, 9.
    _Arborator_, 6.
    plantat Arbores, 7.
    in _Pomario_,
    _inseritque Surculos_, 8.
    _Viviradicibus_, 9.

  He fenceth his Garden,
  either by care,
  with a _mound_, 10.
  or a _Stone-wall_, 11.
  or a _rail_, 12.
    Sepit hortum
    vel Cura,
    _Muro_, 10.
    aut _Macerie_, 11.
    aut _Vacerra_, 12.
  or _Pales_, 13.
  or a _Hedge_, 14.
  made of _Hedge-stakes_,
  and _bindings_;
    aut _Plancis_, 13.
    aut _Sepe_, 14.
    flexâ è _sudibus_
    & _vitilibus_;

  Or by Nature, with
  _Brambles_ and _Bryers_, 15.
    Vel Natura
    _Dumis_ & _Vepribus_, 15.

  It is beautified
  with _Walks_, 16.
  and _Galleries_, 17.
    Ornatur
    _Ambulacris_, 16.
    & _Pergulis_, 17.

  It is watered
  with _Fountains_, 18.
  and a _Watering-pot_, 19.
    Rigatur
    _Fontanis_, 18.
    & _Harpagio_, 19.




  XLVI.

  Husbandry.
    Agricultura.

  [Illustration]


  The _Plow-man_, 1.
  yoketh _Oxen_, 3.
  to a _Plough,_ 2.
    _Arator_, 1.
    jungit _Boves_, 3.
    _Aratro_, 2.
  and holding the _Plow-stilt_, 4.
  in his left hand,
  and the _Plow-staff_, 5.
  in his right hand,
    & tenens _Stivam_, 4.
    lævâ,
    _Rallum_, 5.
    dextrâ,
  with which he removeth
  _Clods_, 6.
  he cutteth the Land,
  (which was manured afore
  with _Dung_, 8.)
    quâ amovet
    _Glebas_, 6.
    scindit terram
    (stercoratam antea
    _Fimo_, 8.)
  with a _Share_, 7.
  and a _Coulter_,
  and maketh _furrows_, 9.
    _Vomere_, 7.
    et _Dentali_,
    facitque _Sulcos_, 9.

  Then he _soweth_
  the _Seed_, 10.
  and harroweth it in
  with a _Harrow_, 11.
    Tum _seminat_
    _Semen_, 10.
    & inoccat
    _Occâ_, 11.

  The _Reaper_, 12.
  sheareth the ripe corn
  with a _Sickle_, 13.
  gathereth up the _handfuls_, 14.
  and bindeth the _Sheaves_, 15.
    _Messor_, 12.
    metit fruges maturas
    _Falce messoris_, 13.
    colligit _Manipulos_, 14.
    & colligat _Mergetes_, 15.

  The _Thrasher_, 16.
  thrasheth Corn
  on the _Barn-floor_, 17.
  with a _Flayl_, 18.
    _Tritor_, 16.
    triturat frumentum
    in _Area Horrei_, 17.
    _Flagello_ (tribula), 18.
  tosseth it in a _winnowing-basket_, 19.
  and so when the _Chaff_,
  and the _Straw_, 20.
  are separated from it,
  he putteth it into _Sacks_, 12.
    jactat _ventilabro_, 19.
    atque ita _Paleâ_
    & _Stramine_, 20.
    separatâ,
    congerit in _Saccos_, 21.

  The _Mower_, 22.
  maketh _Hay_
  in a _Meadow_,
  cutting down _Grass_
  with a _Sithe_, 23.
    _Fœniseca_, 22.
    facit _Fœnum_
    in _Prato_,
    desecans _Gramen_
    _Falce fœnaria_, 23.
  and raketh it together
  with a _Rake_, 24.
  and maketh up _Cocks_, 26.
  with a _fork_, 25,
  and carrieth it on _Carriages_, 27.
  into the _Hay-barn_, 28.
    corraditque
    _Rastro_, 24.
    componit _Acervos_, 26.
    _Furca_, 25.
    & convehit _Vehibus_, 27.
    in _Fœnile_, 28.




  XLVII.

  Grasing.
    Pecuaria.

  [Illustration]


  _Tillage of ground_,
  and _keeping Cattle_,
  was in old time
  the care of Kings and Noble-men;
  at this Day only
  of the meanest sort of People,
    _Cultus Agrorum_,
    & _res pecuaria_,
    antiquissimis temporibus, erat
    cura Regum, Heroum;
    hodie tantum
    infirmæ Plebis,

  The _Neat-heard_, 1.
  calleth out the _Heards_, 2.
  out of the _Beast-houses_, 3.
  with a _Horn_, 4.
  and driveth them to feed.
    _Bubulcus_, 1.
    evocat _Armenta_, 2.
    è _Bovilibus_, 3.
    _Buccina_ (Cornu), 4,
    & ducit pastum.

  The _Shepherd_, 5.
  feedeth his _Flock_, 6.
  being furnished with a
  _Pipe_, 7. and a _Scrip_, 8.
  and a _Sheep-hook_, 9.
    _Opilio_ (Pastor), 5.
    pascit _Gregem_, 6.
    instructus _Fistula_, 7.
    & _Pera_, 8.
    ut & _Pedo_, 9.
  having with him
  a great _Dog_, 10.
  fenced with a _Collar_, 11.
  against the _Wolves_.
    habens secum
    _Molossum_, 10.
    munitum _Millo_, 11.
    contra Lupos.

  _Swine_, 12. are fed
  out of a _Swine-Trough_.
    _Sues_, 12. saginantur
    ex _aqualiculo haræ_.

  The _Farmer’s Wife_, 13.
  milketh the _Udders_
  of the _Cow_, 15.
  at the _Cratch_, 15.
  over a _milk-pale_, 16.
    _Villica_, 13.
    mulget _Ubera_
    _vaccæ_, 14.
    ad _Præsepe_, 15.
    super _mulctra_, 16.
  and maketh _Butter_
  of _Cream_
  in a _Churn_, 17.
  and _Cheeses_, 18.
  of _Curds_.
    et facit _Butyrum_
    è _flore lactis_,
    in _Vase butyraceo_, 17.
    et _Caseos_, 18.
    è _Coagulo_.

  The _Wool_, 19.
  is shorn from _Sheep_,
  whereof several _Garments_
  are made.
    _Lana_, 19.
    detondetur _Ovibus_,
    ex quà variæ _Vestes_
    conficiuntur.




  XLVIII.

  The making of Honey.
    Mellificium.

  [Illustration]


  The _Bees_ send out
  a _swarm_, 1. and set over it
  a _Leader_, 2.
    _Apes_ emittunt
    _Examen_, 1. adduntque illi
    _Ducem_ (Regem), 2.

  That swarm
  being ready to fly away
  is recalled by the Tinkling
  of a _brazen Vessel_, 3.
  and is put up
  into a new _Hive_, 4.
    Examen illud,
    avolaturum,
    revocatur tinnitu
    _Vasis ænei_, 3.
    & includitur
    novo _Alveari_, 4.

  They make little _Cells_
  with six corners, 5.
  and fill them with _Honey-dew_,
  and make _Combs_, 6.
  out of which the _Honey_
  runneth, 7.
    Struunt _Cellulas_
    sexangulares, 5.
    et complent eas _Melligine_,
    & faciunt _Favos_, 6.
    è quibus _Mel_
    effluit, 7.

  The _Partitions_
  being melted by fire,
  turn into _Wax_, 8.
    _Crates_
    liquati igne
    abeunt in _Ceram_, 8.




  XLIX.

  Grinding.
    Molitura.

  [Illustration]


  In a _Mill_, 1.
  a Stone, 2. runneth
  upon a stone, 3.
    In _Mola_,
    Lapis, 2. currit
    super lapidem, 3,

  A _Wheel_, 4.
  turning them about and
  grindeth Corn poured in
  by a _Hopper_, 5.
    _Rota_, 4.
    circumagente, et
    conterit grana infusa
    per _Infundibulum_, 5.
  and parteth the _Bran_, 6.
  falling into the _Trough_, 7.
  from the _Meal_
  slipping through a _Bolter_, 8.
    separatque _Furfurem_, 6.
    decidentem in _Cistam_, 7.
    à _Farina_ (Polline)
    elabente per _Excussorium_, 8.

  Such a Mill was first
  a _Hand-mill_, 9.
  then a _Horse-mill_, 10.
  then a _Water-mill_, 11.
  then a _Ship-mill_, 12.
  and at last a _Wind-mill_, 13.
    Talis Mola primùm fuit
    _Manuaria_, 9.
    deinde _Jumentaria_, 10.
    tum _Aquatica_, 11.
    & _Navalis_, 12.
    tandem, _Alata_ (pneumatica), 13.




  L.

  Bread-baking.
    Panificium.

  [Illustration]


  The _Baker_, 1.
  sifteth the _Meal_
  in a _Rindge_, 2.
  and putteth it into
  the _Kneading-trough_, 3.
    _Pistor_, 1.
    cernit _Farinam_
    _Cribo_, 2. (pollinario)
    & indit _Mactræ_, 3.

  Then he poureth water to it
  and maketh _Dough_, 4.
  and kneadeth it
  with a _wooden slice_, 5.
    Tum affundit aquam,
    & facit _Massam_, 4.
    depsitque
    _spatha_, 5. ligneâ.

  Then he maketh
  _Loaves_, 6. _Cakes_, 7.
  _Cimnels_, 8. _Rolls_, 9, &c.
    Dein format
    _Panes_, 6. _Placentas_, 7.
    _Similas_, 8. _Spiras_, 9. &c.

  Afterwards he setteth them
  on a _Peel_, 10.
  and putteth them
  thorow the _Oven-mouth_, 12.
  into the _Oven_, 11.
    Post imponit
    _Palæ_, 10.
    & ingerit
    _Furno_, 11.
    per _Præfurnium_, 12.

  But first he pulleth out
  the fire and the Coals
  with a _Coal-rake_, 13.
  which he layeth on a heap
  underneath, 14.
    Sed priùs eruit
    ignem & Carbones
    _Rutabulo_, 13.
    quos congerit
    infra, 14.

  And thus is _Bread_ baked,
  having the _Crust_ without, 15.
  and the _Crumb_ within, 16.
    Et sic _Panis_ pinsitur
    habens extra _Crustam_, 15.
    intus _Micam_, 16.




  LI.

  Fishing.
    Piscatio.

  [Illustration]


  The _Fisher-man_, 1.
  catcheth fish,
  either on the Shoar,
  with an _Hook_, 2.
    _Piscator_, 1.
    captat pisces,
    sive in littore,
    _Hamo_, 2.
  which hangeth by a _Line_
  from the _angling-rod_,
  on which the _Bait_ sticketh;
    qui pendet _filo_
    ab _arundine_,
    & cui _Esca_ inhæret;
  or with a _Cleek-net_, 3.
  which hangeth on a _Pole_, 4.
  is put into the Water;
    sive _Fundâ_, 3.
    quæ pendens _Pertica_, 4.
    immittitur aquæ;
  or in a _Boat_, 5.
  with a _Trammel-net_, 6.
  or with a _Wheel_, 7.
  which is laid in the Water
  by Night.
    sive in _Cymba_, 5.
    _Reti_, 6.
    sive _Nassa_, 7.
    quæ demergitur
    per Noctem.




  LII.

  Fowling.
    Aucupium.

  [Illustration]


  The _Fowler_, 1.
  maketh a _Bed_, 2,
  spreadeth
  a _Bird-net_, 3.
  throweth a _Bait_, 4. upon it,
    _Auceps_, 1.
    exstruit _Aream_, 2.
    superstruit illi
    _Rete_ aucupatorium, 3.
    obsipat _Escam_, 4.
  and hiding himself in a _Hut_, 5.
  he allureth Birds,
  by the chirping of _Lurebirds_,
  which partly
  hop upon the Bed, 6.
  and are partly shut in _Cages_, 7.
    & abdens se in _Latibulo_, 5.
    allicit Aves,
    cantu _Illicum_,
    qui partim
    in Area currunt, 6.
    partim inclusi sunt _Caveis_, 7.
  and thus he entangleth
  Birds that fly over,
  in his net whilst
  they settle themselves down.
    atque ita obruit
    transvolantes Aves
    Reti, dum
    se demittunt:

  Or he setteth _Snares_, 8.
  on which they hang and
  strangle themselves:
    Aut tendit _Tendiculas_, 8.
    quibus suspendunt &
    suffocant seipsas:

  Or setteth _Lime-twigs_, 9.
  on a _Perch_, 10.
    Aut exponit _Viscatos calamos_, 9.
    _Amiti_, 10.
  upon which if they sit
  they enwrap their Feathers,
  so that they cannot fly away,
  and fall down to the ground.
    quibus si insident,
    implicant pennas,
    ut nequeant avolare,
    & decidunt in terram.

  Or he catcheth them
  with a _Pole_, 11.
  or a _Pit-fall_, 12.
    Aut captat
    _Perticâ_, 11.
    vel _Decipulâ_, 12.




  LIII.

  Hunting.
    Venatus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Hunter_, 1.
  hunteth wild Beasts
  whilst he besetteth a Wood
  with _Toyls_, 2.
  stretched out upon
  _Shoars_, 3.
    _Venator_, 1.
    venatur Feras,
    dum cingit Sylvam,
    _Cassibus_, 2.
    tentis super
    _Varos_, 3. (furcillas.)

  The _Beagle_, 4.
  tracketh the wild Beast
  or findeth him out by the scent;
  the _Tumbler_, or _Greyhound_, 5.
  pursueth it.
    _Canis sagax_, 4.
    vestigat Feram,
    aut indagat odoratu;
    _Vertagus_, 5.
    persequitur.

  The _Wolf_,
  falleth in a _Pit_, 6.
  the _Stag_, 7. as he runneth away,
  into _Toyls_.
    _Lupus_,
    incidit in _Foveam_, 6.
    fugiens _Cervus_, 7.
    in _Plagas_.

  The _Boar_, 8.
  is struck through
  with a _Hunting-spear_, 9.
    _Aper_, 8.
    transverberatur
    _Venabulo_, 9.

  The _Bear_, 10.
  is bitten by Dogs,
  and is knocked
  with a _Club_, 11.
    _Ursus_, 10.
    mordetur à Canibus,
    & tunditur
    _Clavâ_, 11.

  If any thing get away,
  it escapeth, 12. as here
  a _Hare_ and a _Fox_.
    Si quid effugit,
    evadit, 12. ut hic
    _Lepus_ & _Vulpes_.




  LIV.

  Butchery.
    Lanionia.

  [Illustration]


  The _Butcher_, 1.
  killeth _fat Cattle_, 2.
  (The _Lean_, 3.
  are not fit to eat.)
    _Lanio_, 1.
    mactat _Pecudem altilem_, 2.
    (_Vescula_, 3.
    non sunt vescenda.)

  He knocketh them down
  with an _Ax_, 4.
  or cutteth their Throat.
  with a _Slaughter-knife_, 5.
    Prosternit
    _Clavâ_, 4.
    vel jugulat.
    _Cunaculo_, 5.
  he flayeth them, 6.
  and cutteth them in pieces,
  and hangeth out the flesh
  to sell in the _Shambles_, 7.
    excoriat (deglubit,) 6.
    dissecatque
    & exponit carnes,
    venum in _Macello_, 7.

  He dresseth a _Swine_, 8.
  with fire
  or scalding water, 9.
  and maketh _Gamons_, 10.
  _Pistils_, 11.
  and _Flitches_, 12.
    Glabrat _Suem_, 8.
    igne,
    vel aquâ fervidâ, 9.
    & facit _Pernas_, 10.
    _Petasones_, 11.
    & _Succidias_, 12.

  Besides several _Puddings_,
  _Chitterlings_, 13.
  _Bloodings_, 14.
  _Liverings_, 15.
  _Sausages_, 16.
    Prætereà _Farcimina_ varia,
    _Faliscos_, 13.
    _Apexabones_, 14.
    _Tomacula_, 15.
    _Botulos_, (Lucanicas) 16.

  The _Fat_, 17. and
  _Tallow_, 18. are melted.
    _Adeps_, 17. &
    _Sebum_, 18. eliquantur.




  LV.

  Cookery.
    Coquinaria.

  [Illustration]


  _The Yeoman of the Larder_, 1.
  bringeth forth _Provision_, 2.
  out of the _Larder_, 3.
    _Promus Condus_, 1.
    profert _Obsonia_, 2.
    è _Penu_, 3.

  The _Cook_, 4. taketh them
  and maketh _several Meats_.
    _Coquus_, 4. accipit ea
    & coquit _varia Esculenta_.

  He first pulleth off the Feathers
  and draweth the Gutts
  out of the _Birds_, 5.
    Prius deplumat,
    & exenterat _Aves_, 5.

  He scaleth and
  splitteth _Fish_, 6.
    Desquamat &
    exdorsuat _Pisces_, 6.

  He draweth some flesh
  with _Lard_, by means of
  a _Larding-needle_, 7.
    Trajectat quasdem carnes
    _Lardo_, ope
    _Creacentri_, 7.

  He caseth _Hares_, 8.
  then he boileth them in _Pots_, 9.
  and _Kettles_, 10.
  on the _Hearth_, 11.
  and scummeth them
  with a _Scummer_, 12.
    _Lepores_, 8. exuit,
    tum elixat _Ollis_, 9.
    & _Cacabis_, 10.
    in _Foco_, 11.
    & despumat
    _Lingula_, 12.

  He seasoneth things
  that are boyled with Spices,
  which he poundeth with
  a _Pestil_, 14. in a _Morter_, 13.
  or grateth with a _Grater_, 15.
    Condit elixata,
    Aromatibus,
    quæ comminuit
    _Pistillo_, 14. in _Mortario_, 13.
    aut terit _Radulâ_, 15.

  He roasteth some on _Spits_, 16.
  and with a _Jack_, 17.
  or upon a _Grid-iron_, 18.
    Quædam assat _Verubus_, 16.
    & _Automato_, 17.
    vel super _Craticulum_, 18.

  Or fryeth them
  in a _Frying-pan_, 19.
  upon a _Brand-iron_, 20.
    Vel frigit
    _Sartagine_, 19.
    super _Tripodem_, 20.

  _Kitchen utensils_
  besides are,
  a _Coal-rake_, 21.
  a _Chafing-dish_, 22.
    _Vasa Coquinaria_
    præterea sunt,
    _Rutabulum_, 21.
    _Foculus_ (Ignitabulum), 22.
  a _Trey_, 23.
  (in which _Dishes_, 24. and
  _Platters_, 25. are washed),
    _Trua_, 23.
    (in quà _Catini_, 24. &
    _Patinæ_, 25. eluuntur)
  a pair of _Tongs_, 26.
  a _Shredding-knife_, 27.
  a _Colander_, 28.
  a _Basket_, 29.
  and a _Besom_, 30.
    _Forceps_, 26.
    _Culter incisorius,_ 27.
    _Qualus_, 28.
    _Corbis_, 29.
    & _Scopa_, 30.




  LVI.

  The Vintage.
    Vindemia.

  [Illustration]


  _Wine_ groweth
  in the _Vine-yard_, 1.
  where _Vines_ are propagated
    _Vinum_ crescit
    in _Vinea_, 1.
    ubi _Vites_ propagantur,
  and tyed with Twigs
  to _Trees_, 2.
  or to _Props_, 3.
  or _Frames_, 4.
    & alligantur viminibus
    ad _Arbores_, 2.
    vel ad _Palos_ (ridicas), 3.
    vel ad _Juga_, 4

  When the time of
  Grape-gathering is come,
  they cut off the _Bunches_,
  and carry them in
  _Measures of three Bushels_, 5.
    Cùm tempus
    vindemiandi adest,
    abscindunt _Botros_,
    & comportant
    _Trimodiis_, 5.
  and throw them into a _Vat_, 6.
  and tread them
  with their _Feet_, 7.
  or stamp them
  with a _Wooden-Pestil_, 8.
    conjiciuntque in _Lacum_, 6.
    calcant
    _Pedibus_, 7.
    aut tundunt
    _Ligneo Pilo_, 8.
  and squeeze out the juice
  in a _Wine-press_, 9.
  which is called _Must_, 11.
    & exprimunt succum
    _Torculari_, 9.
    qui dicitur _Mustum_, 11.
  and being received
  in a great _Tub_, 10.
  it is poured into
  _Hogsheads_, 12.
    & exceptum
    _Orcâ_, 10.
    infunditur
    _Vasis_ (Doliis), 12.
  it is stopped up, 15.
  and being laid close in _Cellars_
  upon _Settles_, 14.
  it becometh _Wine_.
    operculatur, 15.
    & abditum in _Cellis_,
    super _Cantherios_, 14.
    abit in _Vinum_.

  It is drawn out of the _Hogshead_,
  with a _Cock_, 13.
  or _Faucet_, 16.
  (in which is a _Spigot_)
  the Vessel being unbunged.
    Promitur e _Dolio_
    _Siphone_, 13.
    aut _Tubulo_, 16.
    (in quo est _Epistomium_)
    Vase relito.




  LVII.

  Brewing.
    Zythopœia.

  [Illustration]


  Where _Wine_ is not to be had
  they drink _Beer_,
    Ubi _Vinum_ non habetur,
    bibitur _Cerevisia_ (Zythus),
  which is brewed of _Malt_, 1.
  and _Hops_, 2.
  in a _Caldron_, 3.
    quæ coquitur ex _Byne_, 1.
    & _Lupulo_, 2.
    in _Aheno_, 3.
  afterwards it is poured
  into _Vats_, 4.
  and when it is cold,
  it is carried in _Soes_, 5.
  into the _Cellar_, 6.
  and is put into Vessels.
    post effunditur
    in _Lacus_, 4.
    & frigefactum.
    defertur _Labris_, 5.
    in _Cellaria_, 6.
    & intunditur vasibus.

  _Brandy-wine_,
  extracted by the power of heat
  from dregs of Wine
  in a _Pan_, 7.
    _Vinum sublimatum_,
    extractum vi Caloris
    e fecibus Vini
    in _Aheno_, 7.
  over which a _Limbeck_, 8.
  is placed,
  droppeth through a _Pipe_, 9.
  into a _Glass_.
    cui _Alembicum_, 8.
    superimpositum est.
    destillat per _Tubum_, 9.
    in _Vitrum_.

  Wine and Beer
  when they turn sowre,
  become _Vinegar_.
    Vinum & Cerevisia,
    cum acescunt,
    fiunt _Acetum_.

  Of Wine and Honey
  they make _Mead_.
    Ex Vino & Melle
    faciunt _Mulsum_.




  LVIII.

  A Feast.
    Convivium.

  [Illustration]


  When a _Feast_
  is made ready,
  the table is covered
  with a _Carpet_, 1.
  and a _Table-cloth_, 2.
    Cum _Convivium_
    apparatur,
    Mensa sternitur
    _Tapetibus_, 1.
    & _Mappa_, 2.
  by the _Waiters_,
  who besides lay
  the _Trenchers_, 3.
  _Spoons_, 4.
  _Knives_, 5.
    à _Tricliniariis_,
    qui prætereà opponunt
    _Discos_ (Orbes), 3.
    _Cochlearia_, 4.
    _Cultros_, 5.
  with little _Forks_, 6.
  _Table-napkins_, 7.
  _Bread_, 8.
  with a _Salt-seller_, 9.
    cum _Fuscinulis_, 6.
    _Mappulas_, 7.
    _Panem_, 8.
    cum _Salino_, 9.

  _Messes_ are brought
  in _Platters_, 10.
  a _Pie_, 19. on a _Plate_.
    _Fercula_ inferuntur
    in _Patinis_, 10.
    _Artocrea_, 19. in _Lance_.

  The Guests being brought in
  by the _Host_, 11.
  wash their Hands
  out of a _Laver_, 12.
  or _Ewer_, 14.
    Convivæ introducti
    ab _Hospite_, 11.
    abluunt manus
    è _Gutturnio_, 12.
    vel _Aquali_, 14.
  over a _Hand-basin_, 13.
  or _Bowl_, 15.
  and wipe them
  on a _Hand-towel_, 16.
    super _Malluvium_, 13.
    aut _Pelvim_, 15.
    terguntque
    _Mantili_, 16.
  then they sit at the Table
  on _Chairs_, 17.
    tum assident Mensæ
    per _Sedilia_, 17.

  The _Carver_, 18.
  breaketh up the good Cheer,
  and divideth it.
    _Structor_, 18.
    deartuat dapes,
    & distribuit.

  _Sauces_ are set amongst
  _Roast-meat_, in Sawcers, 20.
    _Embammata_ interponuntur
    _Assutaris_ in Scutellis, 20.

  The _Butler_, 21.
  filleth _strong Wine_
  out of a _Cruise_, 25.
  or _Wine-pot_, 26.
  or _Flagon_, 27.
    _Pincerna_, 21.
    infundit _Temetum_,
    ex _Urceo_, 25.
    vel _Cantharo_, 26.
    vel _Lagena_, 27.
  into _Cups_, 22.
  or _Glasses_, 23.
  which stand
  on a _Cupboard_, 24.
    in _Pocula_, 22.
    vel _Vitrea_, 23.
    quæ extant
    in _abaco_, 24.
  and he reacheth them
  to the _Master of the Feast_, 28.
  who drinketh to his _Guests_.
    & porrigit,
    _Convivatori_, 28.
    qui propinat _Hospitibus_.




  LIX.

  The Dressing of Line.
    Tractatio Lini.

  [Illustration]


  _Line_ and _Hemp_
  being rated in water,
  and dryed again, 1.
    _Linum_ & _Cannabis_,
    macerata aquis,
    et siccata rursum, 1.
  are braked
  with a _wooden Brake_, 2.
  where the _Shives_, 3.
  fall down,
    contunduntur
    _Frangibulo ligneo_, 2.
    ubi _Cortices_, 3.
    decidunt
  then they are heckled
  with an _Iron Heckle_, 4.
  where the _Tow_, 5.
  is parted from it.
    tum carminantur
    _Carmine ferreo_, 4.
    ubi _Stupa_, 5.
    separatur.

  _Flax_ is tyed to a _Distaff_, 6.
  by the _Spinster_, 7.
    _Linum purum_ alligatur _Colo_, 6.
    à _Netrice_, 7.
  which with her left hand
  pulleth out the _Thread_, 8.
  and with her right hand
  turneth a _Wheel_, 9.
    quæ sinistra
    trahit _Filum_, 8.
    dexterâ, 12.
    _Rhombum_ (girgillum), 9.
  or a _Spindle_, 10.
  upon which is a _Wharl_, 11.
    vel _Fusum_, 10.
    in quo _Verticillus_, 11.

  The _Spool_ receiveth
  the _Thread_, 13.
  which is drawn thence
  upon a _Yarn-windle_, 14.
    _Volva_ accipit
    _Fila_, 13.
    inde deducuntur
    in _Alabrum_, 14.
  hence either _Clews_, 15.
  are wound up,
  or _Hanks_, 16. are made.
    hinc vel _Glomi_, 15.
    glomerantur,
    vel _Fasciculi_, 16. fiunt.




  LX.

  Weaving.
    Textura.

  [Illustration]


  The _Webster_
  undoeth the _Clews_, 1.
  into _Warp_,
    _Textor_
    diducit _Glomos_, 1.
    in _Stamen_,
  and wrappeth it about
  the _Beam_, 2.
  and as he sitteth
  in his _Loom_, 3.
  he treadeth upon the _Treddles_, 4.
  with his Feet.
    & circumvolvit
    _Jugo_, 2.
    ac sedens
    in _Textrino_, 3.
    calcat _Insilia_, 4.
    pedibus.

  He divideth the _Warp_, 5.
  with _Yarn_.
  and throweth the _Shuttle_, 6. through,
    Diducit _Stamen_, 5.
    _Liciis_,
    & trajicit _Radium_, 6.
  in which is the _Woofe_,
  and striketh it close.
  with the _Sley_, 7.
  and so maketh
  _Linen cloth_, 8.
    in quo est _Trama_,
    ac densat.
    _Pectine_, 7.
    atque ita conficit
    _Linteum_, 8.

  So also the _Clothier_
  maketh _Cloth_ of _Wool_.
    Sic etiam _Pannifex_
    facit _Pannum_ è _Lana_.




  LXI.

  Linen Cloths.
    Lintea.

  [Illustration]


  _Linnen-webs_
  are bleached in the _Sun_, 1.
  with Water poured on them, 2.
  till they be white.
    _Linteamina_
    insolantur, 1.
    aquâ perfusâ, 2.
    donec candefiant.

  Of them the _Sempster_, 3.
  soweth _Shirts_, 4.
  _Handkirchers_, 5.
  _Bands_, 6. _Caps_, &c.
    Ex iis _Sartrix_, 3.
    suit _Indusia_, 4.
    _Muccinia_, 5.
    _Collaria_, 6. _Capitia_, &c.

  These if they be fouled,
  are washed again
  by the _Laundress_, 7. in water,
  or _Lye_ and _Sope_.
    Haec, si sordidentur
    lavantur rursum,
    a _Lotrice_, 7. aquâ,
    sive _Lixivio_ ac _Sapone_.




  LXII.

  The Taylor.
    Sartor.

  [Illustration]


  The _Taylor_, 1. cutteth
  _Cloth_, 2. with _Shears_, 3.
    _Sartor_, 1. discindit
    _Pannum_, 2. _Forfice_, 3.
  and seweth it together with a _Needle_
  and _double thread_,
    consuitque _Acu_
    & _Filo duplicato_, 4.

  Then he presseth the _Seams_
  with a _Pressing-iron_, 5.
    Posteâ complanat _Suturas_
    _Ferramento_, 5.

  And thus he maketh
  _Coats_, 6.
  with _Plaits_, 7.
  in which the _Border_, 8. is below
  with _Laces_, 9.
    Sicque conficit
    _Tunicas_, 6.
    _Plicatas_, 7.
    in quibus infra est _Fimbria_, 8.
    cum _Institis_, 9.

  _Cloaks_, 10.
  with a _Cape_, 11.
  and _Sleeve Coats_, 12.
    _Pallia_, 10.
    cum _Patagio_, 11.
    & _Togas Manicatas_, 12.

  _Doublets_, 13.
  with _Buttons_, 14.
  and _Cuffs_, 15.
    _Thoraces_, 13.
    cum _Globulis_, 14.
    & _Manicis_, 15.

  _Breeches_, 16.
  sometimes with _Ribbons_, 17.
    _Caligas_, 16.
    aliquando cum _Lemniscis_, 17.

  _Stockins_, 18.
    _Tibialia_, 18.

  _Gloves_, 19.
  _Muntero Caps_, 20. &c.
    _Chirothecas_, 19.
    _Amiculum_, 20. &c.

  So the _Furrier_
  maketh _Furred Garments_
  of _Furs_.
    Sic _Pellio_
    facit _Pellicia_
    è _Pellibus_.




  LXIII.

  The Shoemaker.
    Sutor.

  [Illustration]


  The _Shoemaker_, 1.
  maketh _Slippers_, 7.
    _Sutor_, 1.
    conficit _Crepidas_ (Sandalia,) 7.
  _Shoes_, 8.
  (in which is seen
  above, the _Upper-leather_,
  beneath the _Sole_,
  and on both sides
  the _Latchets_)
    _Calceos_, 8.
    (in quibus spectatur
    superne _Obstragulum_,
    inferne _Solea_,
    et utrinque
    _Ansæ_)
  _Boots_, 9.
  and _High Shoes_, 10.
  of _Leather_, 5.
  (which is cut with
  a _Cutting-knife_), 6.
    _Ocreas_, 9.
    et _Perones_, 10.
    e _Corio_, 5.
    (quod discinditur
    _Scalpro Sutorio_, 6.)
  by means of an _Awl_, 2.
  and _Lingel_, 3.
  upon a _Last_, 4.
    ope _Subulæ_, 2.
    et Fili _picati_, 3.
    super _Modum_, 4.




  LXIV.

  The Carpenter.
    Faber lignarius.

  [Illustration]


  We have seen Man’s food
  and clothing:
  now his Dwelling followeth.
    Hominis victum
    & amictum, vidimus:
    sequitur nunc Domicilium ejus.

  At first they dwelt
  in _Caves_, 1. then in
  _Booths_ or _Huts_, 2.
  and then again in _Tents_, 3.
  at the last in _Houses_.
    Primò habitabant
    in _Specubus_, 1. deinde in
    _Tabernaculis_ vel _Tuguriis_, 2.
    tum etiam in _Tentoriis_, 3.
    demum in _Domibus_.

  The _Woodman_
  felleth and heweth down
  _Trees_, 5. with an _Ax_, 4.
  the _Boughs_, 6. remaining.
    _Lignator_
    sternit & truncat
    _Arbores_, 5. _Securi_, 4.
    remanentibus _Sarmentis_, 6.

  He cleaveth _Knotty Wood_
  with a _Wedge_, 7.
  which he forceth in
  with a _Beetle_, 8.
  and maketh _Wood-stacks_, 9.
    Findit _Nodosum_,
    _Lignum Cuneo_, 7.
    quem adigit
    _Tudite_, 8.
    & componit _Strues_, 9.

  The _Carpenter_
  squareth _Timber_
  with a _Chip-Ax_, 10.
    _Faber Lignarius_
    ascit _Ascia_, 10.
    _Materiem_,
  whence _Chips_, 11. fall,
  and saweth it with a _Saw_, 12.
  where the _Saw-dust_, 13.
  falleth down.
    unde _Assulæ_, 11. cadunt,
    & serrat _Serrâ_, 12.
    ubi _Scobs_, 13.
    decidit.

  Afterwards he lifteth
  the _Beam_ upon _Tressels_, 14.
    Post elevat
    _Tignum_ super _Canterios_, 14·
  by the help of a _Pully_, 15.
  fasteneth it
  with _Cramp-irons_, 16.
  and marketh it out
  with a _Line_, 17.
    ope _Trochleæ_, 15.
    affigit
    _Ansis_, 16.
    & lineat
    _Amussi_, 17.

  Thus he frameth
  the _Walls_ together, 18.
  and fasteneth the great pieces
  with _Pins_, 19.
    Tum compaginat
    _Parietes_, 18.
    & configit trabes
    _Clavis trabalibus_, 19.




  LXV.

  The Mason.
    Faber Murarius,

  [Illustration]


  The _Mason_, 1.
  layeth a _Foundation_,
  and buildeth _Walls_, 2.
    _Faber Murarius_, 1.
    ponit _Fundamentum_,
    & struit _Muros_, 2.

  Either of _Stones_
  which the _Stone-digger_
  getteth out of the _Quarry_, 3.
  and the _Stone-cutter_, 4.
  squareth by a _Rule_, 5.
    Sive è _Lapidibus_,
    quos _Lapidarius_
    eruit in _Lapicidina_, 3.
    & _Latomus_, 4.
    conquadrat ad _Normam_, 5.

  Or of _Bricks_, 6.
  which are made
  of _Sand_ and _Clay_
  steeped in water,
  and are burned in fire.
    Sive è _Lateribus_, 6.
    qui formantur,
    ex _Arena_ & _Luto_,
    aquâ intritis
    & excoquuntur igne.

  Afterwards he plaistereth it
  with _Lime_,
  by means of a _Trowel_,
  and garnisheth with
  a _Rough-cast_, 8.
    Dein crustat
    _Calce_,
    ope _Trullæ_, 7.
    & vestit _Tectorio_, 8.




  LXVI.

  Engines.
    Machinæ.

  [Illustration]


  One can carry
  as much by thrusting
  a _Wheel-barrow_, 3.
  before him,
  (having an _Harness_, 4.
  hanging on his neck,)
    Unus potest ferre
    tantum trudendo
    _Pabonem_, 3.
    ante se,
    (_Ærumna_,
    Suspensâ a Collo)
  as two men
  can carry on a _Colestaff_, 1.
  or _Hand-barrow_, 2.
    quantum duo
    possunt ferre _Palangâ_,
    vel _Feretro_, 2.

  But he can do more that
  rolleth a Weight laid upon
  _Rollers_, 6. with a _Leaver_, 5.
    Plus autem potest qui
    provolvit Molem impositam
    _Phalangis_ (Cylindris, 6.)
    _Vecte_, 5.

  A _Wind-beam_, 7.
  is a post, which
  is turned by going about it.
    _Ergata_, 7.
    est columella, quæ
    versatur circumeundo.

  A _Crane_, 8.
  hath a _Hollow-wheel_,
  in which one walking
  draweth weights out of a Ship,
  or letteth them down
  into a Ship.
    _Geranium_, 8.
    habet _Tympanum_,
    cui inambulans quis
    extrahit pondera navi,
    aut demittit in navem.

  A _Rammer_, 9.
  is used to fasten
  _Piles_, 10.
    _Fistuca_, 9.
    adhibetur ad pangendum
    _Sublicas_, 10.
  it is lifted with a Rope
  drawn by _Pullies_, 11.
  or with hands.
  if it have _handles_, 12.
    adtollitur Fune
    tracto per _Trochleas_, 11.
    vel manibus,
    si habet _ansas_, 12.




  LXVII.

  A House.
    Domus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Porch_, 1.
  is before the _Door_
  of the _House_.
    _Vestibulum_, 1.
    est ante _Januam_
    _Domûs_.

  The _Door_ hath
  a _Threshold_, 2.
  and a _Lintel_, 3.
  and _Posts_, 4. on both sides.
    _Janua_ habet
    _Limen_, 2.
    & _Superliminare_, 3.
    & _Postes_, 4. utrinque.

  The _Hinges_, 5.
  are upon the right hand,
  upon which the _Doors_, 6. hang,
    _Cardines_, 5.
    sunt a dextris,
    à quibus pendent _Fores_, 6.
  the _Latch_, 7.
  and the _Bolt_, 8.
  are on the left hand.
    _Claustrum_, 7.
    aut _Pessulus_, 8.
    a sinistris.

  Before the House
  is a _Fore-court_, 9.
  with a _Pavement_
  of _square stones_, 10.
    Sub ædibus
    est _Cavædium_, 9.
    _Pavimento_
    _Tessellato_, 10.
  born up with _Pillars_, 11.
  in which is the _Chapiter_, 12.
  and the _Base_, 13.
    fulcitum _Columnis_, 11.
    in quibus _Peristylium_, 12.
    & _Basis_, 13.

  They go up into the upper
  Stories by _Greeses_, 14.
  and _Winding-stairs_, 15.
    Ascenditur in superiores
    contignationes per _Scalas_, 14.
    & _Cochlidia_, 15.

  The _Windows_, 16.
  appear on the outside,
    _Fenestræ_, 16.
    apparent extrinsecus,
  and the _Grates_, 17.
  the _Galleries_, 18.
  the _Watertables_, 19.
  the _Butteresses_, 20.
  to bear up the walls.
    & _Cancelli_ (clathra), 17.
    _Pergulæ_, 18.
    _Suggrundia_, 19.
    & _Fulcra_, 20.
    fulciendis muris.

  On the top is the _Roof_, 21.
  covered with _Tyles_, 22.
  or _Shingles_, 23.
  which lie upon _Laths_, 24.
  and these upon _Rafters_, 25.
    In summo est _Tectum_, 21.
    contectum _Imbricibus_
    (_tegulis_), 22.
    vel _Scandulis_, 23.
    quæ incumbunt _Tigillis_, 24.
    hæc _Tignis_, 25.

  The _Eaves_, 26.
  adhere to the _Roof_.
    _Tecto_ adhæret
    _Stillicidium_, 26.

  The place without a Roof
  is called an _open Gallery_, 27.
    Locus sine Tecto
    dicitur _Subdiale_, 27.

  In the Roof are
  _Jettings out_, 28.
  and _Pinnacles_, 29.
    In Tecto sunt
    _Meniana_, 28.
    & _Coronides_, 29.




  LXVIII.

  A Mine.
    Metallifodina.

  [Illustration]


  _Miners_, 1.
  go into the _Grave_, 2.
  by a _Stick_, 3.
  or by _Ladders_, 4.
  with _Lanthorns_, 5.
    _Metalli fossores_, 1.
    ingrediuntur _Puteum fodinæ_, 2.
    _Bacillo_, 3.
    sive _Gradibus_, 4.
    cum _Lucernis_, 5.
  and dig out with a _Pick_, 6.
  the _Oar_,
  which being put in _Baskets_, 7.
  is drawn out with a _Rope_, 8.
  by means of a _Turn_, 9.
    & effodiunt _Ligone_, 6.
    _terram Metallicam_,
    quæ imposita _Corbibus_, 7.
    extrahitur _Fune_, 8.
    ope _Machinæ tractoriæ_, 9.
  and is carried
  to the _Melting-house_, 10.
  where it is forced with fire,
  that the _Metal_ may run out, 12.
    & defertur
    in _Ustrinam_, 10.
    ubi urgetur igne,
    ut _Metallum_, 12. profluat
  the _Dross_, 11.
  is thrown aside.
    _Scoriæ_, 11.
    abjiciuntur seorsim.




  LXIX.

  The Blacksmith.
    Faber Ferrarius.

  [Illustration]


  The _Blacksmith_, 1.
  in his _Smithy_ (or Forge), 2.
  bloweth the fire
    _Faber ferrarius_, 1.
    in _Ustrina_ (Fabricâ), 2.
    inflat ignem
  with a _pair of Bellows_, 3.
  which he bloweth
  with his _Feet_, 4.
  and so heateth the _Iron_:
    _Folle_, 3.
    quem adtollit
    _Pede_, 4.
    atq; ita candefacit _Ferrum_:

  And then he taketh it out
  with the _Tongs_, 5.
  layeth it upon the _Anvile_, 6.
  and striketh it
  with an _Hammer_, 7.
  where the _sparks_, 8. fly off.
    Deinde eximit
    _Forcipe_, 5.
    imponit _Incudi_, 6.
    & cudit
    _Malleo_, 7.
    ubi _Stricturæ_, 8. exiliunt.

  And thus are hammer’d out,
  _Nails_, 9.
  _Horse-shoes_, 10.
  _Cart-strakes_, 11.
  _Chains_, 12.
    Et sic excuduntur,
    _Clavi_, 9.
    _Solea_, 10.
    _Canthi_, 11.
    _Catenæ_, 12.
  _Plates_, _Locks_ and _Keys_,
  _Hinges_, &c.
    _Laminæ_, _Seræ_ cum _Clavibus_,
    _Cardines_, &c.

  He quencheth hot Irons
  in a _Cool-trough_.
    Restinguit cadentia,
    Ferramenta in _Lacu_.




  LXX.

  The Box-maker and the Turner.
    Scrinarius & Tornator.

  [Illustration]


  The _Box-maker_, 1.
  smootheth _hewen Boards_, 2.
  with a _Plain_, 3.
  upon a _work-board_, 4.
    _Arcularius_, 1.
    edolat _Asseres_, 2.
    _Runcina_, 3.
    in _Tabula_, 4.
  he maketh them very smooth
  with a _little-plain_, 5.
  he boreth them thorow
  with an _Augre_, 6.
    deplanat
    _Planula_, 5.
    perforat (terebrat)
    _Terebra_, 6.
  carveth them
  with a _Knife_, 7.
  fasteneth them together
  with _Glew_ and _Cramp-Irons_, 8.
    sculpit
    _Cultro_, 7.
    combinat
    _Glutine_ & _Subscudibus_, 8.
  and maketh _Tables_, 9.
  _Boards_, 10.
  _Chests_, 11. &c.
    & facit _Tabulas_, 9.
    _Mensas_, 10.
    _Arcus_ (Cistas), 11. &c.

  The _Turner_, 12.
  sitting over the _Treddle_, 13.
  turneth with a _Throw_, 15.
  upon a _Turner’s Bench_, 14.
    _Tornio_, 12.
    sedens in _Insili_, 13.
    tornat _Torno_, 15.
    super _Scamno Tornatorio_, 14.
  _Bowls_, 16. _Tops_, 17,
  _Puppets_, 18. and
  such like _Turners Work_.
    _Globos_, 16. _Conos_, 17.
    _Icunculas_, 18. &
    similia _Toreumata_.




  LXXI.

  The Potter.
    Figulus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Potter_, 1.
  sitting over a _Wheel_, 2.
  maketh _Pots_, 4.
  _Pitchers_, 5.
  _Pipkins_, 6.
    _Figulus_, 1.
    sedens super _Rota_, 2.
    format _Ollas_, 4.
    _Urceos_, 5.
    _Tripodes_, 6.
  _Platters_, 7.
  _Pudding-pans_, 8.
  _Juggs_, 9.
  _Lids_, 10. &c.
  of _Potter’s Clay_, 3.
    _Patinas_, 7.
    _Vasa testacea_, 8.
    _Fidelias_, 9.
    _Opercula_, 10. &c.
    ex _Argillâ_, 3.
  afterwards he baketh them
  in an _Oven_, 11.
  and glazeth them
  with _White Lead_.
    postea excoquit
    in _Furno_, 11.
    & incrustat
    _Lithargyro_.

  A broken Pot affordeth
  _Pot-sheards_, 1
    Fracta Olla dat
    _Testas_, 12.




  LXXII.

  The Parts of a House.
    Partes Domus.

  [Illustration]


  A _House_ is divided
  into inner _Rooms_,
  such as are the _Entry_, 1.
    _Domus_ distinguitur
    in _Conclavia_,
    ut sunt _Atrium_, 1.
  the _Stove_, 2.
  the _Kitchen_, 3.
  the _Buttery_, 4.
  the _Dining Room_, 5.
    _Hypocaustum_, 2.
    _Culina_, 3.
    _Cella Penuaria_, 4.
    _Cœnaculum_, 5.
  the _Gallery_, 6.
  the _Bed Chamber_, 7.
  with a _Privy_, 8.
  made by it.
    _Camera_, 6.
    _Cubiculum_, 7.
    cum _Secessu_ (Latrina), 8.
    adstructo.

  _Baskets_, 9.
  are of use for
  carrying things.
  and _Chests_, 10. (which are
  made fast with a _Key_, 11.)
  for keeping them.
    _Corbes_, 9.
    inserviunt
    rebus transferendis,
    _Arcæ_, 10. (quæ
    _Clavâ_, 11. recluduntur)
    adservandis illis.

  Under the _Roof_,
  is the _Floor_, 12.
    Sub _Tecto_,
    est _Solum_ (Pavimentum), 12.

  In the _Yard_, 13.
  is a _Well_, 14.
  a _Stable_, 15.
  and a _Bath_, 16.
    In _Area_, 13.
    _Puteus_, 14.
    _Stabulum_, 15.
    cum _Balneo_, 16.

  Under the House
  is the _Cellar_, 17.
    Sub Domo
    est _Cella_, 17.




  LXXIII.

  The Stove with the Bed-room.
    Hypocaustum cum Dormitorio.

  [Illustration]


  The _Stove_, 1.
  is beautified
  with an _Arched Roof_, 2.
  and _wainscoted Walls_, 3.
    _Hypocaustum_, 1.
    ornatur
    _Laqueari_, 2.
    & _tabulatis Parietibus_, 3.

  It is enlightened
  with _Windows_, 4.
    Illuminatur
    _Fenestris_, 4.

  It is heated
  with an _Oven_, 5.
    Calefit
    _Fornace_, 5.

  Its Utensils are
  _Benches_, 6.
  _Stools_, 7.
  _Tables_, 8.
    Ejus Utensilia sunt
    _Scamna_, 6.
    _Sellæ_, 7.
    _Mensæ_, 8.
  with _Tressels_, 9.
  _Footstools_, 10.
  and _Cushions_, 11.
    cum _Fulcris_, 9.
    ac _Scabellis_, 10.
    & _Culcitris_, 11.

  There are also _Tapestries_
  hanged, 12.
    Appenduntur etiam
    _Tapetes_, 12.

  For soft lodging
  in a _Sleeping-room_, 13.
  there is a _Bed_, 14.
    Pro levi cubatu,
    in _Dormitorio_, 13.
    est _Lectus_, (Cubile) 14.
  spread on a _Bed-sted_, 15.
  upon a _Straw-pad_, 16.
  with _Sheets_, 17.
  and _Cover-lids_, 18.
    stratus in _Sponda_, 15.
    super _Stramentum_, 16.
    cum _Lodicibus_, 17.
    & _Stragulis_, 18.

  The _Bolster_, 19.
  is under ones head.
    _Cervical_, 19.
    est sub capite.

  The Bed is covered
  with a _Canopy_, 20.
    _Canopeo_, 20.
    _Lectus_ tegitur.

  A _Chamber-pot_, 21.
  is for making water in.
    _Matula_, 21.
    est vesicæ levandæ.




  LXXIV.

  Wells.
    Putei.

  [Illustration]


  Where _Springs_ are wanting,
  _Wells_, 1. are digged.
  and they are compassed about
  with a _Brandrith_, 2.
  lest any one fall in.
    Ubi _Fontes_ deficiunt,
    _Putei_, 1. effodiuntur,
    & circumdantur
    _Crepidine_, 2.
    ne quis incidat.

  Thence is water drawn
  with _Buckets_, 3.
  hanging either at a _Pole_, 4.
  or a _Rope_, 5.
  or a _Chain_, 6.
    Inde aqua hauritur
    _Urnis_ (situlis), 3.
    pendentibus vel _Pertica_, 4.
    vel _Fune_, 5.
    vel _Catena_, 6.
  and that either by a _Swipe_, 7.
  or a _Windle_, 8.
  or a _Turn_, 9.
    idque aut _Tollenone_, 7.
    aut _Girgillo_, 8.
    aut _Cylindro_, 9.
  with a _Handle_
  or a _Wheel_, 10.
  or to conclude,
  by a _Pump_, 11.
    _Manubriato_.
    aut _Rota_ (tympano), 10.
    aut denique
    _Antliâ_, 11.




  LXXV.

  The Bath.
    Balneum.

  [Illustration]


  He that desireth to be wash’d
  in cold water,
  goeth down into a _River_, 1.
    Qui cupit lavari
    aquâ frigidâ,
    descendit in _Fluvium_, 1.

  In a _Bathing-house_, 2.
  we wash off the _filth_
  either sitting in a _Tub_, 3.
    In _Balneario_, 2.
    abluimus _squalores_,
    sive sedentes in _Labro_, 3.
  or going up
  into the _Hot-house_, 4.
  and we are rubbed
  with a _Pumice-stone_, 6.
  or a _Hair-cloth_, 5.
    sive conscendentes
    in _Sudatorium_, 4.
    & defricamur
    _Pumice_, 6.
    aut _Cilicio_, 5.

  In the _Stripping-room_, 7.
  we put off our clothes,
  and are tyed about
  with an _Apron_, 8.
    In _Apodyterio_, 7.
    exuimus Vestes,
    & præcingimur
    _Castula_ (Subligari), 8.

  We cover our Head
  with a _Cap_, 9.
  and put our feet
  into a _Bason_, 10.
    Tegimus caput
    _Pileolo_, 9.
    & imponimus pedes
    _Telluvio_, 10.

  The _Bath-woman_, 11.
  reacheth water in a _Bucket_, 12.
  drawn out of the _Trough_, 13.
  into which it runneth
  out of _Pipes_, 14.
    _Balneatrix_, 11.
    ministrat aquam _Situla_, 12.
    haustam ex _Alveo_, 13.
    in quem defluit
    è _Canalibus_, 14.

  The _Bath-keeper_, 15.
  lanceth with a _Lancet_, 16.
    _Balneator_, 15.
    scarificat _Scalpro_, 16.
  and by applying
  _Cupping-glasses_, 17.
  he draweth the _Blood_
  betwixt the skin and the flesh,
  which he wipeth away
  with a _Spunge_, 18.
    & applicando
    _Cucurbitas_, 17.
    extrahit _Sanguinem_
    subcutaneum,
    quem abstergit
    _Spongiâ_, 18.




  LXXVI.

  The Barbers Shop.
    Tonstrina.

  [Illustration]


  The _Barber_, 1.
  in the _Barbers-shop_, 2.
  cutteth off the _Hair_
  and the _Beard_
    _Tonsor_, 1.
    in _Tonstrina_, 2.
    tondet _Crines_
    & _Barbam_
  with a pair of _Sizzars_, 3.
  or shaveth with a _Razor_,
  which he taketh
  out of his _Case_, 4.
    _Forcipe_, 3.
    vel radit _Novaculâ_,
    quam depromit
    è _Theca_, 4.

  And he washeth one
  over a _Bason_, 5.
  with _Suds_ running
  out of a _Laver_, 6.
  and also with _Sope_, 7.
    Et lavat
    super _Pelvim_, 5.
    _Lixivio_ defluente
    è _Gulturnio_, 6.
    ut & _Sapone_, 7.
  and wipeth him
  with a _Towel_, 8.
  combeth him with a _Comb_, 9.
  and curleth him
  with a _Crisping Iron_, 10.
    & tergit
    _Linteo_, 8.
    pectit _Pectine_, 9.
    crispat
    _Calamistro_, 10.

  Sometimes he cutteth a _Vein_
  with a _Pen-knife_, 11.
  where the Blood
  spirteth out, 12.
    Interdum secat Venam
    _Scalpello_, 11.
    ubi Sanguis
    propullulat, 12.

  The _Chirurgeon_ cureth
  _Wounds_.
    _Chirurgus_ curat
    _Vulnera_.




  LXXVII.

  The Stable.
    Equile.

  [Illustration]


  The _Horse-keeper_, 1.
  cleaneth the _Stable_
  from _Dung_, 2.
    _Stabularius_ (Equiso), 1.
    purgat _Stabulum_
    a _Fimo_, 2.

  He tyeth a _Horse_, 3.
  with a _Halter_, 4.
  to the _Manger_, 5.
    aut si mordax
    constringit
    _Fiscella_, 6.
  or if he apt to bite,
  he maketh him fast
  with a _Muzzle_, 6.
    Alligat _Equum_, 3.
    _Capistro_, 4.
    ad _Præsepe_, 5.

  Then he streweth _Litter_, 7.
  under him.
    Deinde substernit
    _Stramenta_, 7.

  He _winnoweth Oats_
  with a _Van_, 8.
  (being mixt with Chaff,
  and taken out
  of a _Chest_, 10.)
    _Ventilat Avenam_,
    _Vanno_, 8.
    (Paleis mixtam,
    ac depromptam
    à _Cista Pabulatoria_, 10.)
  and with them feedeth the Horse,
  as also with _Hay_, 9.
    eâque pascit equum,
    ut & _Fœno_, 9.

  Afterwards he leadeth him
  to the _Watering-trough_, 11.
  to water.
    Postea ducit
    ad _Aquarium_, 11.
    aquatum.

  Then he rubbeth him
  with a _Cloth_, 12.
  combeth him
  with a _Curry-comb_, 15.
  covereth him
  with an _Housing-cloth_, 14.
    Tum detergit
    _Panno_, 12.
    depectit
    _Strigili_, 15.
    insternit
    _Gausape_, 14.
  and looketh upon his _Hoofs_
  whether the _Shoes_, 13.
  be fast with the _Nails_.
    & inspicit _Soleas_,
    an _Calcei ferrei_, 13.
    firmis _Clavis_ hæreant.




  LXXVIII.

  Dials.
    Horologia.

  [Illustration]


  A _Dial_
  measureth Hours.
    _Horologium_
    dimetitur Horas.

  A _Sun-dial_, 1.
  sheweth by the shadow
  of the _Pin_, 2.
  what a _Clock_ it is;
  either on a Wall,
  or a _Compass_, 3,
    _Solarium_, 1.
    ostendit umbrâ
    _Gnomonis_, 2.
    quota sit _Hora_;
    sive in Pariete,
    sive in _Pyxide Magnetica_, 3.

  An _Hour-glass_, 4.
  sheweth the four parts of an hour
  by the running of _Sand_,
  heretofore of water.
    _Clepsydra_, 4.
    ostendit partes horæ quatuor,
    fluxu _Arenæ_,
    olim aquæ.

  A _Clock_, 5.
  numbereth also
  the Hours of the Night,
    _Automaton_, 5.
    numerat etiam
    Nocturnas Horas,
  by the turning of the Wheels,
  the greatest whereof
  is drawn by a _Weight_, 6.
  and draweth the rest.
    circulatione Rotarum,
    quarum maxima
    trahitur à _Pondere_, 6.
    & trahit cæteras.

  Then either the _Bell_, 7.
  by its sound, being struck on
  by the _Hammer_,
  or the _Hand_, 8. without,
  by its motion about
  sheweth the hour.
    Tum vel _Campana_, 7.
    sonitu suo, percussâ
    a _Malleolo_,
    vel _Index_ extra
    Circuitione sua
    indicat horam.




  LXXIX.

  The Picture.
    Pictura.

  [Illustration]


  _Pictures_, 1.
  delight the Eyes
  and adorn Rooms.
    _Picturæ_, 1.
    oblectant Oculos
    & ornant Conclavia.

  The _Painter_, 2.
  painteth an _Image_
  with a _Pencil_, 3.
    _Pictor_, 2.
    pingit _Effigiem_
    _Penicilio_, 3.
  in a _Table_, 4.
  upon a _Case-frame_, 5.
  holding his _Pollet_, 6.
  in his left hand,
    in _Tabula_, 4.
    super _Pluteo_, 5.
    tenens _Orbem Pictorium_, 6.
    in sinistra,
  on which are the _Paints_
  which were ground
  by the _Boy_, 7. on a _Marble_.
    in quo _Pigmenta_
    quæ terebantur
    à _puero_, 7. in _marmore_.

  The _Carver_
  and _Statuary_
  carve _Statues_, 8.
  of Wood and Stone.
    _Sculptor_,
    & _Statuarius_
    exsculpunt _Statuas_, 8.
    è Ligno & Lapide.

  The _Graver_
  and the _Cutter_
  grave _Shapes_, 10.
  and _Characters_
    _Cœlator_
    & _Scalptor_
    insculpit _Figuras_, 10.
    & _Characteres_,
  with a _Graving Chesil_, 9.
  in Wood, Brass,
  and other Metals.
    _Cœlo_, 9.
    Ligno, Æri,
    aliisque Metallis.




  LXXX.

  Looking-glasses.
    Specularia.

  [Illustration]


  _Looking-glasses_, 1.
  are provided that Men
  may see themselves.
    _Specularia_, 1.
    parantur, ut homines
    intueantur seipsos.

  _Spectacles_, 2.
  that he may see better,
  who hath a weak sight.
    _Perspicilla_, 2.
    ut cernat acius
    qui habet visum debilem.

  Things afar off are seen
  in a _Perspective Glass_, 3.
  as things near at hand.
    Remota videntur
    per _telescopium_, 3.
    ut proxima.

  A _Flea_ appeareth
  in a _muliplying-glass_, 4.
  like a little hog.
    _Pulex_, 4.
    in _Microscopio_ apparet
    ut porcellus.

  The Rays of the Sun,
  burn wood
  through a _Burning-glass_, 5.
    Radii Solis
    accendunt ligna
    per _Vitrum urens_, 5.




  LXXXI.

  The Cooper.
    Vietor.

  [Illustration]


  The _Cooper_, 1.
  having an _Apron_, 2,
  tied about him,
    _Vietor_, 1.
    amictus
    _Præcinctorio_, 2.
  maketh _Hoops_
  of _Hazel-rods_, 3.
  upon a _cutting-block_, 4.
  with a _Spoke-Shave_, 5.
  and _Lags_, 6. of _Timber_,
    facit _Circulos_,
    è _Virgis Colurnis_, 3.
    super _Sellam incisoriam_, 4.
    _Scalpro bimanubriato_, 5.
    & _Assulas_, 6. ex _Ligno_.

  Of _Lags_ he maketh
  _Hogsheads_, 7. and _Pipes_, 8.
  with two _Heads_;
    Ex Assulis conficit
    _Dolia_, 7. & _Cupas_, 8.
    _Fundo_ bino;
  and _Tubs_, 9.
  _Soes_, 10.
  _Flaskets_, 11.
  _Buckets_, 12.
  with one Bottom.
    tum _Lacus_, 9.
    _Labra_, 10.
    _Pitynas_ [Trimodia], 11.
    & _Situlas_, 12.
    fundo uno.

  Then he bindeth them
  with _Hoops_, 13.
  which he tyeth fast
  with small _Twigs_, 15.
    Postea vincit
    _Circulis_, 13.
    quos ligat
    _Viminibus_, 15.
  by means of a _Cramp-iron_, 14.
  and he fitteth them on
  with a _Mallet_, 16.
  and a _Driver_, 17.
    ope _Falcis vietoriæ_, 14.
    & aptat
    _Tudite_, 16.
    ac _Tudicula_, 17.




  LXXXII.

  The Roper, and the Cordwainer.
    Restio, & Lorarius.

  [Illustration]


  The _Roper_, 1.
  twisteth _Cords_, 2.
  of _Tow_, or _Hemp_, 4.
    _Restio_, 1.
    contorquet _Funes_, 2.
    è _Stupa_, 4. vel _Cannabi_,
  (which he wrappeth about
  himself)
  by the turning of a _Wheel_, 3.
    quam circumdat
    sibi
    agitatione _Rotulæ_, 3.

  Thus are made
  first _Cords_, 5.
  then _Ropes_, 6.
  and at last, _Cables_, 7.
    Sic fiunt,
    primò _Funiculi_, 5.
    tum _Restes_, 6.
    tandem _Rudentes_, 7.

  The _Cord-wainer_, 8.
  cutteth great _Thongs_, 10.
  _Bridles_, 11.
  _Girdles_, 12.
    _Lorarius_, 8.
    scindit _Loramenta_, 10.
    _Fræna_, 11.
    _Cingula_, 12.
  _Sword-belts_, 13.
  _Pouches_, 14.
  _Port-mantles_, 15. &c.
  out of a _Beast-hide_, 9.
    _Baltheos_, 13.
    _Crumenas_, 14.
    _Hippoperas_, 15., &c.
    de _corio bubulo_, 9.




  LXXXIII.

  The Traveller.
    Viator.

  [Illustration]


  A _Traveller_, 1.
  beareth on his shoulders
  in a _Budget_, 2.
  those things
  which his _Satchel_, 3.
  or _Pouch_, 4. cannot hold.
    Viator, 1.
    portat humeris
    in _Bulga_, 2.
    quæ non capit
    _Funda_, 3.
    vel _Marsupium_, 4.

  He is covered
  with a _Cloak_, 5.
    Tegitur
    _Lacernâ_, 5.

  He holdeth a _Staff_, 6.
  in his hand wherewith
  to bear up himself.
    Tenet _Baculum_, 6.
    Manu quo
    se fulciat.

  He hath need of
  _Provision for the way_,
  as also of a pleasant and
  merry _Companion_, 7.
    Opus habet
    _Viatico_,
    ut & fido &
    facundo _Comite_, 7.

  Let him not forsake
  the _High-road_, 9.
  for a _Foot-way_, 8.
  unless it be a _beaten Path_.
    Non deserat
    _Viam regiam_
    propter _Semitam_, 8.
    nisi sit _Callis tritus_.

  _By-ways_, 10.
  and _places where two ways meet_, 11.
  deceive and lead men aside
    _Avia_, 10.
    & _Bivia_, 11.
    fallunt & seducunt,
  into _uneven-places_, 12.
  so do not _By-paths_, 13.
  and _Cross-ways_, 14.
    in _Salebras_, 12.
    non æquè _Tramites_, 13.
    & _Compita_, 14,

  Let him therefore enquire
  of _those he meeteth_, 15.
  which way he must go;
    Sciscitet igitur
    _obvios_, 15.
    quà sit eundum;
  and let him take heed
  of _Robbers_, 16.
  as in the _way_, so also
  in the _Inn_, 17.
  where he lodgeth all Night.
    & caveat
    _Prædones_, 16.
    ut in _viâ_, sic etiam
    in _Diversorio_, 17.
    ubi pernoctat.




  LXXXIV.

  The Horse-man.
    Eques.

  [Illustration]


  The _Horse-man_, 1.
  setteth a _Saddle_, 2.
  on his _Horse_, 3.
  and girdeth it on
  with a _Girth_, 4.
    _Eques_, 1.
    imponit _Equo_, 2.
    _Ephippium_, 3.
    idque succingit
    _Cingulo_, 4.

  He layeth a _Saddle-cloth_, 5.
  also upon him.
    Insternit etiam
    _Dorsuale_, 5.

  He decketh him with
  _Trappings_, a _Fore-stall_, 6.
  a _Breast-cloth_, 7.
  and a _Crupper_, 8.
    Ornat eum
    _Phaleris_, _Frontali_, 6.
    _Antilena_, 7.
    & _Postilena_, 8,

  Then he getteth upon
  his Horse, putteth his feet
  into the _Stirrops_, 9.
  taketh
  the _Bridle-rein_, 10. 11.
    Deinde insilit in
    Equum, indit pedes
    _Stapedibus_, 9.
    capessit _Lorum_
    (habenam), 10. _Freni_, 11.
  in his left hand,
  wherewith he guideth
  and holdeth the Horse.
    sinistrâ
    quo flectit,
    & retinet Equum.

  Then he putteth to
  his _Spurs_, 12.
  and setteth him on
  with a _Switch_, 13.
  and holdeth him in
  with a _Musrol_, 14.
    Tum admovet
    _Calcaria_, 12.
    incitatque
    _Virgula_, 13.
    & coërcet
    _Postomide_, 14.

  The _Holsters_, 15.
  hang down from the _Pummel_
  of the _Saddle_, 16.
  in which the _Pistols_, 17.
  are put.
    _Bulgæ_, 15.
    pendent ex _Apice_
    _Ephippii_, 16.
    quibus _Sclopi_, 17.
    inseruntur.

  The Rider is clad in
  a short _Coat_, 18.
  his _Cloak_ being tyed
  behind him, 19.
    Ipse Eques induitur
    _Chlamyde_, 18.
    _Lacernâ_ revinctâ, 19.
    à tergo.

  A _Post_, 20.
  is carried on Horseback
  at full Gallop.
    _Veredarius_, 20.
    fertur Equo
    cursim.




  LXXXV.

  Carriages.
    Vehicula.

  [Illustration]


  We are carried on a _Sled_, 1.
  over Snow and Ice.
    Vehimur _Trahâ_, 1.
    super Nivibus & Glacie.

  A Carriage with one Wheel,
  is called a _Wheelbarrow_, 2.
  with two Wheels, a _Cart_, 3.
    Vehiculum unirotum,
    dicitur _Pabo_, 2.
    birotum, _Carrus_, 3.
  with four Wheels, a _Wagon_,
  which is either
  a _Timber-wagon_, 4.
  or a _Load-wagon_, 5.
    quadrirotum, _Currus_,
    qui vel
    _Sarracum_, 4.
    vel _Plaustrum_, 5.

  The parts of the Wagon are,
  the _Neep_ (or draught-tree), 6.
  the _Beam_, 7.
  the _Bottom_, 8.
  and the _Sides_, 9.
    Partes Currûs sunt,
    _Temo_, 6.
    _Jugum_, 7.
    _Compages_, 8.
    _Spondæ_, 9.

  Then the _Axle-trees_, 10.
  about which the _Wheels_ run,
  the _Lin-pins_, 11.
  and _Axletree-staves_, 12.
  being fastened before them.
    Tum _Axes_, 10.
    circa quos _Rotæ_ currunt,
    _Paxillis_, 11.
    & _Obicibus_, 12.
    præfixis.

  The _Nave_, 13. is
  the groundfast of the _Wheel_, 14.
  from which come
  twelve _Spokes_, 15.
    _Modiolus_, 13. est
    Basis _Rotæ_, 14.
    ex quo prodeunt
    duodecim _Radii_, 15.

  The _Ring_ encompasseth
  these, which is made
  of six _Felloes_, 16.
  and as many _Strakes_, 17.
    _Orbile_ ambit
    hos, compositum
    è sex _Absidibus_, 16.
    & totidem _Canthis_, 17.
  _Hampiers_ and _Hurdles_, 18,
  are set in a Wagon.
    _Corbes_ & _Crates_, 18.
    imponuntur Currui.




  LXXXVI.

  Carrying to and fro.
    Vectura.

  [Illustration]


  The _Coach-man_, 1.
  joineth a _Horse fit to match_
  _a Saddle-horse_, 2, 3.
    _Auriga_, 1.
    jungit _Parippum_, 2.
    _Sellario_, 3.
  to the _Coach-tree_,
  with _Thongs_ or _Chains_, 5.
  hanging down from
  the _Collar_, 4.
    ad _Temonem_,
    _Loris_ vel _Catenis_, 5.
    dependentibus de
    _Helcio_, 4.

  Then he sitteth upon
  the _Saddle-horse_,
  and driveth them that go
  before him, 6.
  with a _Whip_, 7.
  and guideth them
  with a _String_, 8
    Deinde insidet
    _Sellario_,
    agit ante se
    antecessores, 6.
    _Scuticâ_, 7.
    & flectit
    _Funibus_, 8.

  He greaseth the _Axle-tree_
  with _Axle-tree grease_
  out of a _Grease-pot_, 9.
  and stoppeth the wheel
  with a _Trigen_, 10.
  in a steep descent.
    Ungit _Axem_
    _Axungiâ_,
    ex _vase unguentorio_, 9.
    & inhibet rotam
    Sufflamine, 10.
    in præcipiti descensu.

  And thus the Coach is driven
  along the _Wheel-ruts_, 11.
    Et sic aurigatur
    per _Orbitas_, 11.

  _Great Persons_ are carryed
  _with six Horses_, 12.
  by two _Coachmen_,
  in a Hanging-wagon,
  which is called
  a _Coach_, 13.
    _Magnates_ vehuntur
    _Sejugibus_, 12.
    duobus _Rhedariis_,
    Curru pensili,
    qui vocatur
    _Carpentum_ (Pilentum), 13.

  Others _with two Horses_, 14.
  in a _Chariot_, 15.
    Alii _Bijugibus_, 14.
    _Essedo_, 15.

  _Horse Litters_, 16, 17.
  are carried by two Horses.
    _Arceræ_, 16. & _Lacticæ_, 17.
    portantur à duobus Equis.

  They use
  _Pack-Horses_,
  instead of _Waggons_,
  thorow _Hills_
  that are not passable, 18.
    Utuntur
    _Jumentis Clitellariis_,
    loco _Curruum_,
    per _montes_
    invios, 18.




  LXXXVII.

  Passing over Waters.
    Transitus Aquarum.

  [Illustration]


  Lest he that is to pass
  over a River should be wet,
  _Bridges_, 1.
  were invented for Carriages,
  and _Foot-bridges_, 2.
  for Foot-men.
    Trajecturus
    flumen ne madefiat,
    _Pontes_, 1.
    excogitati sunt pro Vehiculis
    & _Ponticuli_, 2.
    pro Peditibus.

  If a river
  have a _Foord_, 3.
  it is _waded over_, 4.
    Si Flumen
    habet _Vadum_, 3.
    _vadatur_, 4.

  _Flotes_, 5. also are made
  of Timber pinned together;
  or _Ferry-boats_, 6.
  of planks laid close together
  for fear they should
  receive Water.
    _Rates_, 5. etiam struuntur
    ex compactis tignis:
    vel _Pontones_, 6.
    ex trabibus consolidatis,
    ne excipiant aquam.

  Besides _Scullers_, 7.
  are made, which
  are rowed with an _Oar_, 8.
  or _Pole_, 9.
  or haled
  with an _Haling-rope_, 10.
    Porrò _Lintres_ (Lembi), 7.
    fabricantur, qui
    aguntur _Remo_, 8.
    vel _Conto_, 9.
    aut trahuntur
    _Remulco_, 10.




  LXXXVIII.

  Swimming.
    Natatus.

  [Illustration]


  Men are wont also
  to swim over Waters
  upon a _bundle of flags_, 1.
    Solent etiam
    tranare aquas
    super _scirpeum fascem_, 1.
  and besides upon blown
  _Beast-bladders_, 2.
  and after, by throwing
  their _Hands_ and _Feet_, 3.
  abroad.
    porrò super inflatas
    _boum Vesicas_, 2.
    deinde liberè jactatu
    _Manuum Pedumque_, 3.

  And at last they learned
  _to tread the water_, 4.
  being plunged
  up to the girdle-stead,
  and carrying
  their Cloaths upon their head.
    Tandem didicerunt
    _calcare aquam_, 4.
    immersi
    cingulo tenus
    & gestantes
    Vestes supra caput.

  A _Diver_, 5.
  can swim also under
  the water like a Fish.
    _Urinator_, 5.
    etiam natare potest sub
    aquâ, ut Piscis.




  LXXXIX.

  A Galley.
    Navis actuaria.

  [Illustration]


  A _Ship_ furnished
  with _Oars_, 1.
  is a _Barge_, 2.
  or a _Foyst_, &c.
    _Navìs_ instructa
    _Remis_, 1.
    est _Uniremis_, 2.
    vel _Biremis_, &c.
  in which the _Rowers_, 3.
  sitting on _Seats_, 4.
  by the _Oar-rings_,
  row, by striking the water
  with the _Oars_, 5.
    in quâ _Remiges_, 3.
    considentes pre _Transtra_, 4.
    ad _Scalmos_,
    remigant pellendo aquam
    _Remis_,

  The _Ship-master_, 6.
  standing in the _Fore-castle_,
    _Proreta_, 6.
    stans in _Prora_,
  and the _Steers-man_, 7.
  sitting at the _Stern_,
  and holding the _Rudder_, 8.
  steer the _Vessel_.
    & _Gubernator_, 7.
    sedens in _Puppi_,
    tenensque _Clavum_, 8.
    gubernant _Navigium_.




  XC.

  A Merchant-ship.
    Navis oneraria.

  [Illustration]


  A _Ship_, 1.
  is driven onward
  not by Oars, but by the only
  force of the Winds.
    _Navigium_, 1.
    impellitur,
    non remis, sed solâ
    vi Ventorum.

  In it is a _Mast_, 2. set up,
  fastened with _Shrowds_, 3.
  on all sides to
  the _main-chains_.
    In illo _Malus_, 2. erigitur,
    firmatus _Funibus_, 3.
    undique ad _Oras Navis_,
  to which the _Sail-yards_, 4.
  are tied,
  and the _Sails_, 5. to these,
  which are _spread open_, 6.
  to the wind,
  and are hoysed by _Bowlings_, 7.
    cui annectuntur
    _Antennæ_, 4.
    his, _Vela_, 5.
    quæ _expanduntur_, 6.
    ad Ventum
    & _Versoriis_, 7. versantur.

  The Sails are
  the _Main-sail_, 8.
  the _Trinket_, or _Fore-sail_, 9.
  the _Misen-sail_ or _Poop-sail_, 10.
    Vela sunt
    _Artemon_, 8.
    _Dolon_, 9.
    & _Epidromus_, 10.

  The _Beak_, 11.
  is in the _Fore-deck_.
    _Rostrum_, 11.
    est in _Prora_.

  The _Ancient_, 12.
  is placed in the _Stern_.
    _Signum_ (vexillum), 12.
    ponitur in _Puppi_.

  On the Mast
  is the _Foretop_, 13.
  the _Watch-tower_ of the Ship
    In Malo
    est _Corbis_, 13.
    _Specula_ Navis
  and over the _Fore-top_
  a _Vane_, 14.
  to shew which way
  the Wind standeth.
    & supra _Galeam_
    _Aplustre_, 14.
    Ventorum Index.

  The ship is stayed
  with an _Anchor_, 15.
    Navis sistitur
    _Anchorâ_, 15.

  The depth is fathomed
  with a _Plummet_, 16.
    Profunditas exploratur
    _Bolide_, 16.

  Passengers walk up and down
  the _Decks_, 17.
    Navigantes deambulant
    in _Tabulato_, 17.

  The Sea men run to and fro
  through the _Hatches_, 18.
    Nautæ cursitant
    per _Foros_, 18.

  And thus, even Seas
  are passed over.
    Atque ita, etiam Maria
    trajiciuntur.




  XCI.

  Ship-wreck.
    Naufragium.

  [Illustration]


  When a _Storm_, 1.
  ariseth on a sudden,
  they strike _Sail_, 2.
    Cum _Procella_, 1.
    oritur repentè
    contrahunt _Vela_, 2.
  lest the Ship should be
  dashed against _Rocks_, 3 or
  light upon _Shelves_, 4.
    ne Navis
    ad _Scopulos_, 3. allidatur, aut
    incidat in _Brevia_ (Syrtes), 4.

  If they cannot hinder her
  they suffer _Ship-wreck_, 5.
    Si non possunt prohibere
    patiuntur _Naufragium_, 5.

  And then the men,
  the _Wares_, and all things
  are miserably lost.
    Tum Homines,
    _Merces_, omnia
    miserabiliter pereunt.

  Nor doth the _Sheat-anchor_, 6.
  being cast with a _Cable_,
  do any good.
    Neque hic _Sacra anchora_, 6.
    _Rudenti_ jacta
    quidquam adjuvat.

  Some escape,
  either on a _Plank_, 7.
  and by swimming,
  or in the _Boat_, 8.
    Quidam evadunt,
    vel _tabula_, 7.
    ac enatando,
    vel _Scapha_, 8.

  Part of the Wares,
  with the dead folks,
  is carried out of the _Sea_, 9.
  upon the Shoars.
    Pars Mercium
    cum mortuis
    a _Mari_, 9.
    in littora defertur.




  XCII.

  Writing.
    Ars Scriptoria.

  [Illustration]


  The Ancients writ
  in _Tables done over with wax_
  with a brazen _Poitrel_, 1.
    Veteres scribebant
    in _Tabellis ceratis_
    æneo _Stilo_, 1.
  with the _sharp end_, 2. whereof
  letters were engraven
  and rubbed out again
  with the _broad end_, 3.
    cujus _parte cuspidata_, 2.
    exarabantur literæ,
    rursum vero obliterabantur
    _planâ_.

  Afterwards
  they writ _Letters_
  with a _small Reed_, 4.
    Deinde
    _Literas_ pingebant
    _subtili Calamo_, 4.

  We use a _Goose-quill_, 5.
  the _Stem_, 6. of which
  we make
  with a _Pen-knife_, 7.
    Nos utimur _Anserina Penna_, 5.
    cujus _Caulem_, 6.
    temperamus
    _Scalpello_, 7.
  then we dip the _Neb_
  in an _Ink-horn_, 8.
  which is stopped
  with a _Stopple_, 9.
    tum intingimus _Crenam_
    in _Atramentario_, 8.
    quod obstruitur
    _Operculo_, 9.
  and we put our _Pens_,
  into a _Pennar_, 10.
    & _Pennas_
    recondimus in _Calamario_, 10.

  We dry a Writing
  with _Blotting-paper_,
  or _Calis-sand_
  out of a _Sand-box_, 11.
    Siccamus Scripturam
    _Chartâ bibulâ_,
    vel _Arenâ scriptoria_,
    ex _Theca Pulveraria_, 11.

  And we indeed
  write from the left hand
  towards the right, 12.
  the _Hebrews_
  from the right hand
  towards the left, 13.
    Et nos quidem
    scribimus â sinistra
    dextrorsum, 12.
    _Hebræi_
    â dextrâ
    sinistrorsum, 13.
  the _Chinese_ and other _Indians_,
  from the top
  downwards, 14.
    _Chinenses_ & _Indi_ alii,
    â summo
    deorsum, 14.




  XCIII.

  Paper.
    Papyrus.

  [Illustration]


  The Ancients used
  _Beech-Boards_, 1.
  or _Leaves_, 2.
  as also _Barks_, 3. of _Trees_;
    Veteres utebantur
    _Tabulis Faginis_, 1.
    aut _Foliis_, 2.
    ut & _Libris_, 3. _Arborum_;
  especially of an Egyptian Shrub,
  which was called _Papyrus_.
    præsertim Arbusculæ Ægyptiæ,
    cui nomen erat _Papyrus_.

  Now _Paper_ is in use
  which the _Paper-maker_
  maketh in a _Paper-mill_, 4.
    Nunc _Charta_ est in usu,
    quam _Chattopœus_
    in _mola Papyracea_, 4. conficit
  of _Linen rags_, 5.
  stamped to _Mash_, 6.
  which being taken up
  in _Frames_, 7.
    è _Linteis vetustis_, 5.
    in _Pulmentum_ contusis, 6.
    quod haustum
    _Normulis_, 7.
  he spreadeth into _Sheets_, 8.
  and setteth them in the Air
  that they may be dryed.
    diducit in _Plagulas_, 8.
    exponitque aëri,
    ut siccentur.

  Twenty-five of these
  make a _Quire_, 9.
  twenty Quires a _Ream_, 10.
  and ten of these
  a _Bale of Paper_, 11.
    Harum XXV.
    faciunt _Scapum_, 9.
    XX. Scapi _Volumen minus_, 10.
    horum X.
    _Volumen majus_, 11.

  That which is to last long
  is written on
  _Parchment_, 12.
    Duraturum diu
    scribitur in
    _Membrana_, 12.




  XCIV.

  Printing.
    Typographia.

  [Illustration]


  The _Printer_ hath
  _metal Letters_
  in a large number
  put into _Boxes_, 5.
    _Typographus_ habet
    _Typos Metallos_,
    magno numero
    distributos per _Loculamenta_, 5.

  The _Compositor_, 1.
  taketh them out one by one
  and according to the _Copy_,
  (which he hath fastened
  before him in a _Visorum_, 2.)
    _Typotheta_, 1.
    eximit illos singulatim,
    & secundum _exemplar_,
    (quod habet præfixum
    sibi _Retinaculo_, 2.)
  composeth words
  in a _Composing-stick_, 3.
  till a _Line_ be made;
    componit Verba
    _Gnomone_, 3.
    donec _versus_ fiat;
  he putteth these in a _Gally_, 4.
  till a _Page_, 6. be made,
  and these again
  in a _Form_, 7.
    hos indit _Formæ_, 4.
    donec _Pagina_, 6. fiat;
    has iterum
    _Tabulâ compositoriâ_, 7.
  and he locketh them up
  in _Iron Chases_, 8.
  with _Coyns_, 9.
  lest they should drop out,
    coarctaque eos
    _Marginibus ferreis_, 8.
    ope _Cochlearum_, 9.
    ne dilabantur,
  and putteth them under
  the _Press_, 10.
    ac subjicit
    _Prelo_, 10.

  Then the _Press-man_
  beateth it over
  with _Printers Ink_,
  by means of _Balls_, 11.
    Tum _Impressor_
    illinit
    _Atramento impressorio_
    ope _Pilarum_, 11.
  spreadeth upon it the Papers
  put in the _Frisket_, 12.
    super imponit Chartas
    inditas _Operculo_, 12.
  which being put under
  the _Spindle_, 14.
  on the _Coffin_, 13.
  and pressed down with
  a _Bar_, 15. he maketh
  to take impression.
    quas subditas
    _Trochleæ_, 14.
    in _Tigello_, 13.
    & impressas
    _Suculâ_, 15. facit
    imbibere typos.




  XCV.

  The Booksellers Shop.
    Bibliopolium.

  [Illustration]


  The _Bookseller_, 1
  selleth _Books_
  in a _Booksellers Shop_, 2.
  of which he writeth
  a _Catalogue_, 3.
    _Bibliopola_, 1.
    vendit _Libros_
    in _Bibliopolio_, 2.
    quorum conscribit
    _Catalogum_, 3.

  The Books are placed
  on _Shelves_, 4.
  and are laid open for use
  upon a _Desk_, 5.
    Libri disponuntur
    per _Repositoria_, 4.
    & exponuntur ad usum,
    super _Pluteum_, 5.

  A Multitude of Books
  is called a _Library_, 6.
    Multitudo Librorum
    vocatur _Bibliotheca_, 6.




  XCVI.

  The Book-binder.
    Bibliopegus.

  [Illustration]


  In times past they glewed
  Paper to Paper,
  and rolled them up together
  into one _Roll_, 1.
    Olim agglutinabant
    Chartam Chartæ,
    convolvebantque eas
    in unum _Volumen_, 1.

  At this day
  the _Book-binder_
  bindeth Books,
  whilst he wipeth, 2. over
  Papers steept
  in _Gum-water_, and then
  foldeth them together, 3.
    Hodiè
    _Compactor_
    compingit Libros,
    dum tergit, 2.
    chartas maceratas
    _aquâ glutinosâ_, deinde
    complicat, 3.
  beateth with a hammer, 4.
  then stitcheth them up, 5.
  presseth them in a _Press_, 6.
  which hath two _Screws_, 7.
    malleat, 4.
    tum consuit, 5.
    conprimit _Prelo_, 6.
    quod habet duos _Cochleas_, 7.
  glueth them on the back,
  cutteth off the edges
  with a _round Knife_, 8.
    conglutinat dorso,
    demarginat
    rotundo _Cultro_, 8.
  and at last covereth them
  with _Parchment_ or _Leather_, 9.
  maketh them handsome,
  and setteth on _Clasps_, 10.
    tandem vestit
    _Membranâ_ vel _Corio_, 9.
    efformat,
    & affigit _Uncinulos_, 10.




  XCVII.

  A Book.
    Liber.

  [Illustration]


  A _Book_
  as to its outward shape,
  is either in _Folio_, 1.
  or in _Quarto_, 2.
  in _Octavo_, 3.
  in _Duodecimo_, 4.
    _Liber_,
    quoad exteriorem formam
    est vel in _Folia_, 1.
    vel in _Quarto_, 2.
    in _Octavo_, 3.
    in _Duodecimo_, 4.
  either _made to open Side-wise_, 5.
  or _Long-wise_, 6.
  with _Brazen Clasps_, 7.
  or _Strings_, 8.
  and _Square-bofles_, 9.
    vel _Columnatus_, 5.
    vel _Linguatus_, 6.
    cum _Æneis Clausuris_, 7.
    vel _Ligulis_, 8.
    & _angularibus Bullis_, 9.

  Within are _Leaves_, 10.
  with two _Pages_,
  sometimes divided
  with _Columns_, 11. and
  _Marginal Notes_, 12.
    Intùs sunt _Folia_, 10.
    duabis _Paginis_,
    aliquando _Columnis_, 11.
    divisa cumq;
    _Notis Marginalibus_, 12.




  XCVIII.

  A School.
    Schola.

  [Illustration]


  A _School_, 1.
  is a Shop in which
  _Young Wits_ are fashion’d
  to vertue, and it is
  distinguish’d into _Forms_.
    _Schola_, 1.
    est Officina, in quâ
    _Novelli Animi_ formantur
    ad virtutem, &
    distinguitur in _Classes_.

  The _Master_, 2.
  sitteth in a _Chair_, 3.
  the _Scholars_, 4.
  in _Forms_, 5.
  he teacheth, they learn.
    _Præceptor_, 2.
    sedet in _Cathedra_, 3.
    _Discipuli_, 4.
    in _Subselliis_, 5.
    ille docet, hi discunt.

  Some things
  are writ down before them
  with _Chalk_ on a _Table_, 6.
    Quædam
    præscribuntur illis
    _Cretâ_ in _Tabella_, 6.

  Some sit
  at a Table, and write, 7.
  he mendeth their Faults, 8.
    Quidam sedent
    ad Mensam, & scribunt, 7.
    ipse corrigit Mendas, 8.

  Some stand and rehearse
  things committed
  to memory, 9.
    Quidam stant, & recitant
    mandata memoriæ, 9.

  Some talk together, 10.
  and behave themselves
  wantonly and carelessly;
  these are chastised
  with a _Ferrula_. 11.
  and a _Rod_, 12.
    Quidam confabulantur, 10.
    ac gerunt se
    petulantes, & negligentes;
    hi castigantur
    _Ferulâ_ (baculo), 11.
    & _Virgâ_, 12.




  XCIX.

  The Study.
    Museum.

  [Illustration]


  The _Study_, 1.
  is a place where a Student, 2.
  apart from Men,
  sitteth alone,
  addicted to his _Studies_,
    _Museum_, 1.
    est locus ubi Studiosus, 2.
    secretus ab Hominibus,
    sedet solus
    deditus _Studiis_,
  whilst he readeth _Books_, 3.
  which being within his reach
  he layeth open upon a _Desk_, 4.
    dum lectitat _Libros_, 3.
    quos penes se
    & exponit super _Pluteum_, 4.
  and picketh all the best things
  out of them
  into his own _Manual_, 5.
    & excerpit optima quæque
    ex illis
    in _Manuale_ suum, 5.
  or marketh them in them
  with a _Dash_, 6.
  or a _little Star_, 7.
  in the _Margent_.
    notat in illis
    _Liturâ_, 6.
    vel _Asterisco_, 7.
    ad _Margiem_.

  Being to sit up late,
  he setteth a _Candle_, 8.
  on a _Candlestick_, 9.
  which is snuffed with _Snuffers_, 10.
    Lucubraturus,
    elevat _Lychnum_ (_Canelam_), 8.
    in _Candelabra_, 9.
    qui emungitur _Emunctorio_, 10.
  before the Candle,
  he placeth a _Screen_, 11.
  which is green, that it may not
  hurt his eye-sight;
    ante Lynchum
    collocat _Umbraculum_, 11.
    quod viride est, ne
    hebetet oculorum aciem;
  richer Persons use a _Taper_,
  for a _Tallow-candle_
  stinketh and smoaketh.
    opulentiores utuntur _Cereo_
    nam _Candela sebacea_
    fœtet & fumigat.

  A _Letter_, 12. is wrapped up,
  writ upon, 13.
  and sealed, 14.
    _Epistola_, 12. complicatur,
    inscribitur, 13.
    & obsignatur, 14.

  Going abroad by night,
  he maketh use of a _Lanthorn_, 15.
  or a _Torch_, 16.
    Prodiens noctu
    utitur _Lanterna_, 15.
    vel _Face_, 16.




  C.

  Arts belonging to Speech.
    Artes Sermones.

  [Illustration]


  _Grammar_, 1.
  is conversant about _Letters_, 2.
  of which it maketh
  _Words_, 3.
    _Grammatica_, 1.
    versatur circa _Literas_, 2.
    ex quibus componit
    _Voces_, _verba_, 3.
  and teacheth how
  to utter, write, 4.
  put together and part
  them rightly.
    docetque
    eloqui, scribere, 4.
    construere, distinguere
    (interpungere) eas recte.

  _Rhetorick_, 5.
  doth as it were paint, 6.
  a rude form, 7.
  of Speech
    _Rhetorica_, 5.
    pingit, 6.
    quasi rudem _formam_, 7.
    Sermonis
  with _Oratory Flourishes_, 8.
  such as are _Figures_,
  _Elegancies_,
  _Adagies_,
    _Oratoriis Pigmentis_, 8.
    ut sunt _Figuræ_,
    _Elegantiæ_,
    _Adagia_ (proverbia)
  _Apothegms_,
  _Sentences_,
  _Similies_,
  _Hierogylphicks, &c._
    _Apothegmata_,
    _Sententiæ_ (Gnomæ)
    _Similia_,
    _Hieroglyphica, &c._

  _Poetry_, 9.
  gathereth these _Flowers_
  _of Speech_, 10.
    _Poesis_, 9.
    colligit hos _Flores_
    _Orationis_, 10.
  and tieth them as it were
  into a little _Garland_, 11.
  and so making of _Prose_
  a _Poem_,
    & colligat quasi
    in _Corallam_, 11.
    atque ita, faciens è _prosa_
    _ligatam orationem_,
  it maketh several sorts
  of _Verses_ and _Odes_,
  and is therefore crowned
  with a _Laurel_, 12.
    componit varia
    _Carmina_ & _Hymnos_ (_Odas_)
    ac propterea coronatur
    _Lauru_, 12.

  _Musick_, 13.
  setteth _Tunes_, 14.
  with _pricks_,
    _Musica_, 13.
    componit _Melodias_, 14.
    _Notis_,
  to which it setteth words,
  and so singeth alone,
  or in _Consort_,
  or by Voice,
  or Musical Instruments, 15.
    quibus aptat verba,
    atque ita cantat sola
    vel _Concentu_ (_Symphonia_),
    aut voce
    aut Instrumentis Musicis, 15.




  CI.

  Musical Instruments.
    Instrumenta musica.

  [Illustration]


  _Musical Instruments_ are
  those which make a sound:
    _Musica instrumenta_ sunt
    quæ edunt vocem:

  First,
  when they are beaten upon,
  as a _Cymbal_, 1. with a _Pestil_,
    Primò,
    cum pulsantur,
    ut _Cymbalum_, 1. _Pistillo_,
  a _little Bell_, 2.
  with an _Iron pellet_ within;
  or _Rattle_, 3.
  by tossing it about:
    _Tintinnabulum_, 2.
    intus _Globulo ferreo_,
    _Crepitaculum_, 3.
    circumversando;
  a _Jews-Trump_, 4.
  being put to the mouth,
  with the fingers;
  a _Drum_, 5.
  and a _Kettle_, 6.
  with a _Drum-stick_, 7.
    _Crembalum_, 4.
    ori admotum,
    Digito;
    _Tympanum_, 5.
    & _Ahenum_, 6.
    _Claviculâ_, 7.
  as also the _Dulcimer_, 8.
  with the _Shepherds-harp_, 9.
  and the _Tymbrel_, 10.
    ut & _Sambuca_, 8.
    cum _Organo pastoritio_, 9.
    & _Sistrum_ (Crotalum), 10.

  Secondly,
  upon which _strings_
  are stretched, and struck upon,
    Secundò,
    in quibus _Chordæ_
    intenduntur & plectuntur
  as the _Psaltery_, 11.
  and the _Virginals_, 12.
  with both hands;
    ut _Nablium_, 11.
    cum _Clavircordio_, 12.
    utrâque manu;
  the _Lute_, 13.
  (in which is the _Neck_, 14.
  the _Belly_, 15,
  the _Pegs_, 16.
    _Testudo_ (Chelys), 13.
    (in quâ _Jugum_, 14.
    _Magadium_, 15.
    & _Verticilli_, 16.
  by which the _Strings_, 17.
  are stretched
  upon the _Bridge_, 18.)
    quibus _Nervi_, 17.
    intenduntur
    super _Ponticulam_, 18.)
  the _Cittern_, 19.
  with the right hand only,
  the _Vial_, 20.
  with a _Bow_, 21.
    & _Cythara_, 19.
    Dexterâ tantum,
    _Pandura_, 20.
    _Plectro_, 21.
  and the _Harp_, 23.
  with a _Wheel_ within,
  which is turned about:
  the _Stops_, 22.
  in every one are touched
  with the left hand.
    & _Lyra_, 23.
    intus rotâ,
    quæ versatur:
    _Dimensiones_, 22.
    in singulis tanguntur
    sinistra.

  At last,
  those which are blown,
  as with the mouth,
    Tandem
    quæ inflantur,
    ut Ore,
  the _Flute_, 24.
  the _Shawm_, 25.
  the _Bag-pipe_, 26.
    _Fistula_ (_Tibia_), 24.
    _Gingras_, 25.
    _Tibia utricularis_, 26.
  the _Cornet_, 27.
  the _Trumpet_, 28, 29.
  or with _Bellows_,
  as a _pair of Organs_, 30.
    _Lituus_, 27.
    _Tuba_, 28. _Buccina_, 29.
    vel _Follibus_,
    ut _Organum pneumaticum_, 30.




  CII.

  Philosophy.
    Philosophia.

  [Illustration]


  The _Naturalist_, 1.
  vieweth all the works of God
  in the World.
    _Physicus_, 1.
    speculatur omnia Dei Opera
    in Mundo.

  The _Supernaturalist_, 2.
  searches out the _Causes_
  and _Effects_ of things.
    _Metaphysicus_, 2.
    perscrutatur _Causas_,
    & rerum _Effecta_.

  The _Arithmetician_,
  reckoneth _numbers_,
  by adding, subtracting,
  multiplying and dividing;
    _Arithmeticus_
    computat _numeros_,
    addendo, subtrahendo,
    multiplicando, dividendo;
  and that either by _Cyphers_, 3.
  on a _Slate_,
  or by _Counters_, 4.
  upon a _Desk_.
    idque vel _Cyphris_, 3.
    in _Palimocesto_,
    vel _Calculis_, 4.
    super _Abacum_.

  _Country people_ reckon, 5.
  with _figures of tens_, X.
  and _figures of five_, V.
    _Rustici_ numerant, 5.
    _Decussibus_, X.
    & _Quincuncibus_, V.
  by _twelves_, _fifteens_,
  and _threescores_.
    per _Duodenas_, _Quindenas_,
    & _Sexagenas_.




  CIII.

  Geometry.
    Geometria.

  [Illustration]


  A _Geometrician_
  measureth the _height_
  of a _Tower_, 1....2.
    _Geometra_
    metitur _Altitudinem_
    _Turris_, 1....2.
  or the _distance_
  of _places_, 3....4.
  either with a _Quadrant_, 5.
  or a _Jacob’s-staff_, 6.
    aut _distantiam_
    _Locorum_, 3....4.
    sive _Quadrante_, 5.
    sive _Radio_, 6.

  He maketh out
  the _Figures of things_,
  with _Lines_, 7.
  _Angles_, 8.
  and _Circles_, 9.
    Designat
    _Figuras rerum_
    _Lineis_, 7,
    _Angulis_, 8.
    & _Circulis_, 9.
  by a _Rule_, 10.
  a _Square_, 11.
  and a _pair of Compasses_, 12.
    ad _Regulam_, 10.
    _Normam_, 11.
    & _Circinum_, 12.

  Out of these arise
  an _Oval_, 13.
  a _Triangle_, 14.
  a _Quadrangle_, 15.
  and other figures.
    Ex his oriuntur
    _Cylindrus_, 13.
    _Trigonus_ 14.
    _Tetragonus_, 15.
    & aliæ figuræ.




  CIV.

  The Celestial Sphere.
    Sphera cælestis.

  [Illustration]


  _Astronomy_ considereth
  the _motion of the Stars_,
  _Astrology_
  the Effects of them.
    _Astronomia_ considerat
    _motus Astrorum_,
    _Astrologia_
    eorum Effectus.

  The _Globe of Heaven_
  is turned about upon
  an _Axle-tree_, 1.
  about the _Globe_
  _of the Earth_, 2.
  in the space of XXIV. hours.
    _Globus Cæli_
    volvitur super
    _Axem_, 1.
    circa _globum_
    _terræ_, 2.
    spacio XXIV. horarum.

  The _Pole-stars_, or _Pole_,
  the _Arctick_, 3.
  the _Antarctick_, 4.
  conclude the _Axle-tree_
  at both ends.
    _Stellæ polares_,
    _Arcticus_, 3.
    _Antarcticus_, 4.
    finiunt _Axem_
    utrinque.

  The _Heaven_ is
  full of Stars every where.
    _Cælum_ est
    Stellatum undique.

  There are reckoned
  above a _thousand fixed Stars_;
  but of _Constellations_
  _towards the North_, XXI.
  _towards the South_, XVI.
    _Stellarum fixarum_
    numerantur plus _mille_;
    _Siderum_ verò
    _Septentrionarium_, XXI.
    _Meridionalium_, XVI.

  Add to these the XII.
  _signs_ of the _Zodiaque_, 5.
  every one XXX. degrees,
  whose names are
    Adde _Signa_, XII.
    _Zodiaci_, 5.
    quodlibet graduum, XXX,
    quorum nomina sunt
  ♈ _Aries_ ♉ _Taurus_,
  ♊ _Gemini_, ♋ _Cancer_,
  ♌ _Leo_, ♍ _Virgo_,
  ♎ _Libra_, ♏ _Scorpius_,
  ♐ _Sagittarius_, ♑ _Capricorn_,
  ♒ _Aquarius_, ♓ _Pisces_.
    ♈ _Aries_ ♉ _Taurus_,
    ♊ _Gemini_, ♋ _Cancer_,
    ♌ _Leo_, ♍ _Virgo_,
    ♎ _Libra_,  ♏ _Scorpius_,
    ♐ _Sagittarius_, ♑ _Capricorn_,
    ♒ _Aquarius_, ♓ _Pisces_.

  Under this move
  the seven _Wandring-stars_
  which they call _Planets_,
    Sub hoc cursitant
    _Stellæ errantes_ VII.
    quas vocant _Planetas_,
  whose way is a circle
  in the middle of the Zodiack,
  called the _Ecliptick_, 6.
    quorum via est Circulvs,
    in medio Zodiaci,
    dictus _Ecliptica_, 6.

  Other Circles are
  the _Horizon_, 7.
  the _Meridian_, 8.
  the _Æquator_, 9.
  the two _Colures_,
    Alii Circuli sunt
    _Horizon_, 7.
    _Meridianus_, 8.
    _Equator_, 9.
    duo _Coluri_,
  the one of the _Equinocts_, 10.
  (of the _Spring_
  when the ☉ entreth into ♈;
  _Autumnal_
  when it entreth in ♎)
    alter _Æquinoxiorum_, 10.
    (_Verni_,
    quando ☉ ingreditur ♈;
    _Autumnalis_,
    quando ingreditur ♎)
  the other of the _Solstices_, 11.
  (_of the Summer_,
  when the ☉ entreth into ♋
  of the _Winter_
  when it entreth into ♑)
    alter _Solsticiorum_, 11.
    (_Æstivi_,
    quando ☉ ingreditur ♋;
    _Hyberni_,
    quando ingreditur ♑)
  the _Tropicks_,
  the _Tropick of Cancer_, 12.
  the _Tropick of Capricorn_, 13.
  and the two
  _Polar Circles_, 14....15.
    duo _Tropici_,
    _Tr. Cancri_, 12.
    _Tr. Capricorni_, 13.
    & duo
    _Polares_, 14....15.


  [Alternate Text:

  of the _Spring_
  when the [Sun] entreth into [Aries];
  _Autumnal_
  when it entreth in [Libra]
   ...
  _of the Summer_,
  when the [Sun] entreth into [Cancer]
  of the _Winter_
  when it entreth into [Capricorn] ]




  CIV.

  The Aspects of the Planets.
    Planetarum Aspectus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Moon_
  runneth through the _Zodiack_
  every _Month_.
    _Luna_
    percurrit _Zodiacum_
    singulis _Mensibus_.

  The _Sun_, ☉ in a Year.
    _Sol_, ☉ Anno.

  _Mercury_, ☿
  and _Venus_, ♀
  about the Sun,
  the one in a hundred and fifteen,
  the other in 585 days.
    _Mercurius_, ☿
    & _Venus_, ♀
    circa Solem,
    illa CXV.,
    hæc DLXXXV. Diebus.

  _Mars_, ♂ in two years;
    _Mars_, ♂ Biennio;

  _Jupiter_, ♃
  in almost twelve;
    _Jupiter_, ♃
    ferè duodecim;

  _Saturn_, ♄
  in thirty years.
    _Saturnus_, ♄
    triginta annis.

  Hereupon they meet
  variously among themselves,
  and have mutual Aspects
  one towards another.
    Hinc conveniunt
    variè inter se
    & se mutuo adspiciunt.

  As here the ☉ and ☿ are
  in _Conjunction_.
  ☉ and _Moon_
  in _Opposition_,
    Ut hic sunt, ☉ & ☿
    in _Conjunctione_,
    ☉ and _Luna_
    in _Oppositione_,
  ☉ and ♄ in a _Trine Aspect_,
  ☉ and ♃ in a _Quartile_,
  ☉ and ♀ in a _Sextile_.
    ☉ & ♄ in _Trigono_,
    ☉ & ♃ in _Quadratura_,
    ☉ & ♀ in _Sextili_.


  [Alternate Text:

  As here the [Sun] and [Mercury] are
  in _Conjunction_.
  [Sun] and _Moon_
  in _Opposition_,
  [Sun] and [Saturn] in a _Trine Aspect_,
  [Sun] and [Jupiter] in a _Quartile_,
  [Sun] and [Mars] in a _Sextile_. ]




  CV.

  The Apparitions of the Moon.
    Phases Lunæ.

  [Illustration]


  The _Moon_ shineth
  not by her own _Light_
  but that which is borrowed
  of the _Sun_.
    _Luna_, lucet
    non sua propria _Luce_,
    sed mutuatâ
    a _Sole_.

  For the one half of it
  is always enlightned,
  the other remaineth darkish.
    Nam altera ejus medietas
    semper illuminatur,
    altera manet caliginosa.

  Hereupon we see it in
  _Conjunction_ with the _Sun_, 1.
  to be obscure,
  almost none at all;
    Hinc videmus, in
    _Conjunctione Solis_, 1.
    obscuram, imo nullam:
  in _Opposition_, 5.
  whole and clear,
  (and we call it
  the _Full Moon_;)
    in _Oppositione_, 5.
    totam & lucidam,
    (& vocamus
    _Plenilunium_;)
  sometimes in the half,
  (and we call it the _Prime_, 3.
  and _last Quarter_, 7.)
    alias dimidiam,
    (& dicimus _Primam_, 3.
    & _ultimam Quadram_, 7.)

  Otherwise it waxeth, 2....4.
  or waneth, 6....8.
  and is said to be _horned_,
  or more than half _round_.
    Cæteroqui crescit, 2....4.
    aut decrescit, 6....8.
    & vocatur _falcata_,
    vel _gibbosa_.




  CVI.

  The Eclipses.
    Eclipses.

  [Illustration]


  The _Sun_
  is the fountain of light,
  inlightning all things,
    _Sol_
    est fons Lucis,
    illuminans omnia;
  but the _Earth_, 1.
  and the _Moon_, 2.
  being shady bodies,
  are not pierced with its rays,
  for they cast a shadow
  upon the place
  just over against them.
    sed _Terra_, 1.
    & _Luna_, 2.
    Corpora opaca,
    non penetrantur ejus radiis,
    nam jaciunt umbram
    in locum oppositum.

  Therefore,
  when the Moon lighteth
  into the shadow
  of the _Earth_, 2.
    Ideo
    cum Luna incidit
    in umbram
    _Terræ_, 2.
  it is darkened,
  which we call an _Eclipse_,
  or defect.
    obscuratur
    quod vocamus _Eclipsin_
    (deliquium) Lunæ.

  But when the _Moon_
  runneth betwixt the _Sun_
  and the _Earth_, 3.
  it covereth it with
  its shadow;
    Cum vero _Luna_
    currit inter _Solem_
    & _Terram_, 3.
    obtegit illum umbrâ suâ;
  and this we call
  the _Eclipse_ of the _Sun_,
  because it taketh from us
  the sight of the _Sun_,
  and its light;
    & hoc vocamus
    _Eclipsin Solis_,
    quia adimit nobis
    prospectum _Solis_,
    & lucem ejus;
  neither doth the _Sun_
  for all that suffer any thing,
  but the _Earth_.
    nec tamen _Sol_
    patitur aliquid,
    sed _Terra_.




  CVII. _a_

  The terrestial Sphere.
    Sphera terrestris.

  [Illustration]


  The _Earth_ is round, and
  therefore to be represented
  by two _Hemispheres_, a..b.
    _Terra_ est rotunda,
    fingenda igitur
    duobus _Hemispheriis_, a..b.

  The Circuit of it
  is 360 _degrees_
  (whereof every one maketh
  60 _English_ Miles
  or 21600 Miles,)
    Ambitus ejus
    est _graduum_ CCCLX.
    (quorum quisque facit
    LX. Milliaria _Anglica_
    vel 21600 Milliarium)
  and yet it is but a prick,
  compared with the World,
  whereof it is the _Centre_.
    & tamen est punctum,
    collata cum orbe,
    cujus _Centrum_ est.

  They measure Longitude
  of it by _Climates_, 1.
  and the _Latitude_
  by _Parallels_, 2.
    Longitudinem ejus
    dimetiuntur _Climatibus_, 1.
    _Latitudinem_,
    lineis _Parallelis_, 2.

  The _Ocean_, 3.
  compasseth it about,
  and five _Seas_ wash it,
    _Oceanus_, 3.
    ambit eam
    & _Maria_ V. perfundunt
  the _Mediterranean Sea_, 4.
  the _Baltick Sea_, 5. the _Red Sea_, 6.
  the _Persian Sea_, 7.
  and the _Caspian Sea_, 8.
    _Mediterraneum_, 4.
    _Balticum_, 5. _Erythræum_, 6.
    _Persicum_, 7.
    _Caspium_, 8.




  CVII. _b_

  The terrestial Sphere.
    Sphera terrestris.

  [Illustration]

  It is divided into V. _Zones_,
  whereof the II. _frigid ones_,
  9....9.
  are uninhabitable;
    Distribuitur in _Zonas_ V.,
    quarum duæ _frigidæ_,
    9....9.
    sunt inhabitabiles;
  the II. _Temperate_ ones, 10....10.
  and the _Torrid_ one, 11.
  habitable.
    duæ _Temperatæ_, 10....10.
    & _Torrida_, 11.
    habitantur.

  Besides it is divided
  into three _Continents_;
    Ceterum divisa est
    in tres _Continentes;_
  this of ours, 12. which
  is subdivided into _Europe_, 13.
  _Asia,_ 14. _Africa_, 15.
    nostram, 12. quæ
    subdividitur in _Europam_, 13.
    _Asiam_, 14. & _Africam_, 15.
  _America_, 16....16.
  (whose Inhabitants are
  _Antipodes_ to us;)
  and the _South Land_, 17....17.
  yet unknown.
    in _Americam_, 16....16.
    (cujus incolæ sunt
    _Antipodes_ nobis;)
    & in _Terram Australem_, 17....17.
    adhuc incognitam.

  They that dwell
  under the _North pole_, 18.
  have the days and nights
  6 months long.
    Habitantes
    sub _Arcto_, 18.
    habent Dies Noctes
    semestrales,

  Infinite _Islands_
  float in the Seas.
    Infinitæ _Insulæ_
    natant in maribus.




  CVIII.

  Europe.
    Europa.

  [Illustration]


  The chief _Kingdoms_
  of _Europe_, are
    In _Europâ_ nostrâ
    sunt _Regna_ primaria,
  _Spain_, 1.
  _France_, 2.
  _Italy_, 3.
    _Hispania_, 1.
    _Gallia_, 2.
    _Italia_, 3.
  _England_, 4.
  _Scotland_, 5.
  _Ireland_, 6.
    _Anglia_ (Britania), 4.
    _Scotia_, 5.
    _Hibernia_, 6.
  _Germany_, 7.
  _Bohemia_, 8.
  _Hungary_, 9.
    _Germania_, 7.
    _Bohemia_, 8.
    _Hungaria_, 9.
  _Croatia_, 10.
  _Dacia_, 11.
  _Sclavonia_, 12.
  _Greece_, 13.
  _Thrace_, 14.
    _Croatia_, 10.
    _Dacia_, 11.
    _Sclavonia_, 12.
    _Græcia_, 13.
    _Thracia_, 14.
  _Podolia_, 15.
  _Tartary_, 16.
  _Lituania_, 17.
  _Poland_, 18.
    _Podolia_, 15.
    _Tartaria_, 16.
    _Lituania_, 17.
    _Polonia_, 18.
  The _Netherlands_, 19.
  _Denmark_, 20.
  _Norway_, 21.
  _Swethland_, 22.
    _Belgium_, 19.
    _Dania_, 20.
    _Norvegia_, 21.
    _Suecia_, 22.
  _Lapland_, 23.
  _Finland_, 24.
    _Lappia_, 23.
    _Finnia_, 24.
  _Lisland_, 25.
  _Prussia_, 26.
  _Muscovy_, 27.
  and _Russia_, 28.
    _Livonia_, 25.
    _Borussia_, 26.
    _Muscovia_, 27.
    _Russia_, 28.




  CIX.

  Moral Philosophy.
    Ethica.

  [Illustration]


  This _Life_ is a _way_,
  or a _place divided into two ways_,
  like
  _Pythagoras’s Letter_ Y.
    _Vita_ hæc est _via_,
    sive _Bivium_,
    simile
    Litteræ _Pithagoricæ_ Y.
  broad, 1.
  on the left hand track;
  narrow, 2. on the right;
    latum, 1.
    sinistro tramite
    angustum, 2. dextro;
  that belongs to _Vice_, 3.
  this to _Vertue_, 4.
    ille _Vitii_, 3.
    est his _Virtutis_, 4.

  Mind, Young Man, 5.
  imitate _Hercules_:
  leave the left hand way,
  turn from Vice;
    Adverte juvenis, 5.
    imitare _Herculem_;
    linque sinistram,
    aversare Vitium;
  the _Entrance_, 6. is fair,
  but the _End_, 7.
  is ugly and steep down.
    _Aditus_ speciosus, 6.
    sed _Exitus_, 7.
    turpis & præceps.

  Go on the right hand,
  though it be thorny, 8.
  no way is unpassible
  to vertue; follow whither
  vertue leadeth
    Dextera ingredere,
    utut spinosa, 8.
    nulla via invia
    virtuti; sequere quâ
    viâ ducit virtus
  through _narrow places_
  to _stately palaces_,
  to the _Tower of honour_, 9.
    per _angusta_,
    ad _augusta_,
    ad _Arcem honoris_, 9.

  Keep the middle
  and streight _path_,
  and thou shalt go very safe.
    Tene medium
    & rectum _tramitem_;
    ibis tutissimus.

  Take heed thou do not go
  too much on the right hand, 10.
    Cave excedas
    ad dextram, 10.

  Bridle in, 12.
  the wild Horse, 11. of Affection,
  lest thou fall down headlong.
    Compesce freno, 12.
    equum ferocem, 11. Affectûs
    ne præceps fias.

  See thou dost not
  go amiss on the left hand, 13.
  in an ass-like sluggishness, 14.
    Cave
    deficias ad sinistram, 13.
    segnitie asininâ, 14.
  but go onwards constantly,
  persevere to the end,
  and thou shalt be crown’d, 15.
    sed progredere constanter
    pertende ad finem,
    & coronaberis, 15.




  CX.

  Prudence.
    Prudentia.

  [Illustration]


  _Prudence_, 1.
  looketh upon all things
  as a _Serpent_, 2.
  and doeth, speaketh, or
  thinketh nothing in vain.
    _Prudentia_, 1.
    circumspectat omnia
    ut _Serpens_, 2.
    agitque, loquitur, aut
    cogitat nihil incassum.

  She _looks backwards_, 3.
  as into a _Looking-glass_, 4.
  to _things past_;
    _Respicit_, 3.
    tanquam in _Speculum_, 4.
    ad _præterita_;
  and seeth _before her_, 5.
  as with a _Perspective-glass_, 7.
  _things to come_,
  or the _End_, 6.
    & _prospicit_, 5.
    tanquam _Telescopio_, 7.
    _Futura_,
    seu _Finem_, 6.
  and so she perceiveth
  what she hath done, and
  what remaineth to be done.
    atque ita perspicit
    quid egerit, &
    quid restet agendum.

  She proposeth
  an _Honest_, _Profitable_
    Actionibus suis
    præfigit _Scopum_,
    _Honestum_, _Utilem_,
  and withal, if it may be done,
  a _Pleasant End_,
  to her Actions.
    simulque, si fieri potest,
    _Jucundum_.

  Having foreseen the _End_,
  she looketh out _Means_,
  as a _Way_, 8.
  which leadeth to the End;
    _Fine_ prospecto,
    dispicit _Media_,
    ceu _Viam_, 8.
    quæ ducit ad finem,
  but such as are certain
  and easie, and fewer
  rather than more,
  lest anything should hinder.
    sed certa
    & facilia; pauciora
    potiùs quàm plura,
    ne quid impediat.

  She watcheth _Opportunity_, 9.
  (which having
  a _bushy fore-head_, 10.
  and being _bald-pated_, 11.
    Attendit _Occasioni_, 9.
    (quæ
    _Fronte Capillata_, 10.
    sed vertice _calva_, 11.
  and moreover
  _having wings_, 12.
  doth quickly slip away,)
  and catcheth it.
    adhæc
    _alata_, 12.
    facile elabitur)
    eamque captat.

  She goeth on her way
  warily,
  for fear she should stumble
  or go amiss.
    In viâ pergit
    cautè (providè)
    ne impingat
    aut aberret.




  CXI.

  Diligence.
    Sedulitas.

  [Illustration]


  _Diligence_, 1. loveth labours,
  avoideth _Sloth_,
  is always at work,
  like the _Pismire_, 2.
    _Sedulitas_, 1. amat labores,
    fugit _Ignaviam_,
    semper est in _opere_,
    ut _Formica_, 2.
  and carrieth together,
  as she doth, for herself,
  _Store_ of all things, 3.
    & comportat,
    ut illa, sibi,
    omnium rerum _Copiam_, 3.

  She doth not always
  sleep, or make holidays,
  as the _Sluggard_, 4.
  and the _Grashopper_, 5. do,
  whom _Want_, 6.
  at the last overtaketh.
    Non semper
    dormit, ferias agit,
    aut ut _Ignavus_, 4.
    & _Cicada_, 5.
    quos _Inopia_, 6.
    tandem premit.

  She pursueth what things she hath undertaken
  chearfully,
  even to the end;
  she putteth nothing off
  till the morrow,
    Urget incepta
    alacriter
    ad finem usque;
    procrastinat nihil,
  nor doth she sing
  the _Crow’s_ song, 7.
  which saith over and over,
  _Cras, Cras_.
    nec cantat
    cantilenam _Corvi_, 7.
    qui ingeminat
    _Cras, Cras_.

  After _labours_
  _undergone_, and ended,
  being even wearied,
  she resteth her self;
    Post _labores_
    _exantlatos_,
    & lassata,
    quiescit;
  but being refreshed with _Rest_,
  that she may not use her self
  to _Idleness_, she falleth again
  to her _Business_,
    sed recreata _Quiete_,
    ne adsuescat
    _Otio_, redit
    ad _Negotia_.

  A diligent _Scholar_
  is like _Bees_, 8.
  which carry honey
  from divers _Flowers_, 9.
  into their _Hive_, 10.
    Diligens _Discipulus_,
    similis est _Apibus_, 8.
    qui congerunt mel
    ex variis _Floribus_, 9.
    in _Alveare_ suum, 10.




  CXII.

  Temperance.
    Temperantia.

  [Illustration]


  _Temperance_, 1.
  prescribeth a mean
  to _meat_ and _drink_, 2.
    _Temperantia_, 1.
    præscribit _modum_
    _Cibo_ & _Potui_, 2.
  and restraineth the _desire_,
  as with a _Bridle_, 3.
  and so moderateth all things,
  lest any thing
  too much be done.
    & continet _cupidinem_,
    ceu _Freno_, 3.
    & sic moderatur omnia
    ne quid
    nimis fiat.

  _Revellers_
  are made _drunk_, 4.
  they _stumble_, 5.
  they _spue_, 6.
  and _babble_, 7.
    _Heluones_ (ganeones)
    _inebriantur_, 4.
    _titubant_, 5.
    _ructant_ (vomunt), 6.
    & _rixantur_, 7.

  From _Drunkenness_
  proceedeth _Lasciviousness_;
    E _Crapula_
    oritur _Lascivia_;
  from this a _lewd Life_
  amongst _Whoremasters_, 8.
  and _Whores_, 9.
    ex hâc _Vita libidinosa_
    inter _Fornicatores_, 8.
    & _Scorta_, 9.
  in _kissing_,
  _touching_,
  _embracing_,
  and _dancing_, 10.
    _osculando_ (basiando),
    _palpando_,
    _amplexando_,
    & _tripudiando_, 10.




  CXIII.

  Fortitude.
    Fortitudo.

  [Illustration]


  _Fortitude_, 1.
  is undaunted in adversity,
  and bold as a _Lion_, 2. but
  not haughty in Prosperity,
    _Fortitudo_, 1.
    impavida est in adversis,
    & confidens ut _Leo_, 2. at
    non tumida in Secundis,
  leaning on her own _Pillar_, 3.
  _Constancy_, and
  being the same in all things,
  ready to undergo both
  _estates_ with an even mind.
    innixa suo _Columini_, 3.
    _Constantiæ_; &
    eadem in omnibus,
    parata ad ferendam utramque
    _fortunam_ æquo animo.

  She receiveth the strokes
  of _Misfortune_
  with the _Shield_, 4.
  of _Sufferance_: and
  keepeth off the _Passions_,
    Excipit ictus
    _Infortunii_
    _Clypeo_, 4.
    _Tolerantiæ_: &
    propellit _Affectus_,
  the enemies of quietness
  with the _Sword_, 5.
  of _Valour_.
    hostes Euthymiæ
    _gladio_, 5.
    _Virtutis_.


  CXIV.

  Patience.
    Patientia.

  [Illustration]


  _Patience_, 1.
  endureth _Calamities_, 2.
  and _Wrongs_, 3. meekly
  like a _Lamb_, 4.
  as the Fatherly
  _chastisement of God_, 5.
    _Patientia_, 1.
    tolerat _Calamitates_, 2.
    & _Injurias_, 3. humiliter
    ut _Agnus_, 4.
    tanquam paternam
    _ferulam Dei_, 5.

  In the meanwhile she leaneth
  upon the _Anchor of Hope_, 6.
  (as a _Ship_, 7.
  tossed by waves in the Sea)
    Interim innititur
    _Spei Anchoræ_, 6.
    (ut _Navis_, 7.
    fluctuans mari)
  _she prayeth to God_, 8.
  weeping,
  and expecteth the _Sun_, 10.
  after _cloudy weather_, 9.
  suffering evils,
  and hoping better things.
    _Deo supplicat_, 8.
    illacrymando,
    & expectat _Phœbum_, 10.
    post _Nubila_, 9.
    ferens mala,
    sperans meliora.

  On the contrary,
  the _impatient person_, 11.
  waileth, lamenteth,
  _rageth against himself_, 12.
    Contra,
    _Impatiens_, 11.
    plorat, lamentatur,
    _debacchatur_, 12. _in seipsum_,
  grumbleth like a _Dog_, 13.
  and yet doth no good;
  at the last he despaireth,
  and becometh
  _his own Murtherer_, 14.
    obmurmurat ut _Canis_, 13.
    & tamen nil proficit;
    tandem desperat,
    & fit
    _Autochir_, 14.

  Being full of rage he desireth
  to revenge wrongs.
    Furibundus cupit
    vindicare injurias.


  CXV.

  Humanity.
    Humanitas.

  [Illustration]


  _Men_ are made
  for one another’s _good_;
  therefore let them be _kind_.
    _Homines_ facti sunt
    ad mutua _commoda_;
    ergò sint _humani_.

  Be thou sweet and lovely
  in thy _Countenance_, 1.
  gentle and civil
  in thy _Behaviour_ and _Manners_, 2.
    Sis suavis & amabilis
    _Vultu_, 1.
    comis & urbanus
    _Gestu_ ac _Moribus_, 2.
  affable and true spoken
  with thy _Mouth_, 3.
  affectionate and _candid_
  in thy _Heart_, 4.
    affabilis & verax,
    _Ore_, 3.
    candens & _candidus_
    _Corde_, 4.

  So love,
  and so shalt thou be loved;
  and there will be
  a mutual _Friendship_, 5.
    Sic ama,
    sic amaberis;
    & fiat
    mutua _Amicitia_, 5.
  as that of _Turtle-doves_, 6.
  hearty, gentle, and
  wishing well on both parts.
    ceu _Turturum_, 6.
    concors, mansueta, &
    benevola utrinque.

  Froward Men are
  hateful, teasty, unpleasant.
  contentious, _angry_, 7.
  _cruel_, 8.
  and implacable,
    Morosi homines, sunt
    odiosi, torvi, illepidi.
    contentiosi, _iracundi_, 7.
    _crudeles_, 8.
    ac implacabiles,
  (rather Wolves and Lions,
  than Men)
  and such as fall out among themselves,
  hereupon
  they fight in a _Duel_, 9.
    (magis Lupi & Leones,
    quàm homines)
    & inter se discordes,
    hinc
    confligunt _Duelle_, 9.

  _Envy_, 10.
  wishing ill to others,
  pineth away her self.
    _Invidia_, 10.
    malè cupiendo aliis,
    conficit seipsam.


  CXVI.

  Justice.
    Justitia.

  [Illustration]


  _Justice_, 1.
  is painted, sitting
  on a _square stone_, 2. for
  she ought to be immoveable;
    _Justitia_, 1.
    pingitur, sedens
    in _lapide quadrato_, 2. nam
    decet esse immobilis;
  with _hood-winked eyes_, 3.
  that she may not respect
  persons;
  _stopping the left ear_, 4.
  to be reserved
  for the other party;
    _obvelatis oculis_, 3.
    ad non respiciendum
    personas;
    _claudens aurem sinistram_, 4.
    reservandam
    alteri parti;

  Holding in her right Hand
  a _Sword_, 5.
  and a _Bridle_, 6.
  to punish
  and restrain evil men;
    Tenens dextrâ
    _Gladium_, 5.
    & _Frænum_, 6.
    ad puniendum
    & coërcendum malos;

  Besides,
  _a pair of Balances_, 7.
  in the _right Scale_, 8. whereof
  _Deserts_,
  and in the _left_, 9.
  _Rewards_ being put,
    Præterea,
    _Stateram_, 7.
    cujus _dextræ Lanci_, 8.
    _Merita_,
    _Sinistræ_, 9.
    _Præmia_ imposita,
  are made even one with another,
  and so good Men
  are incited to virtue,
  as it were with _Spurs_, 10.
    sibi invicem exequantur,
    atque ita boni
    incitantur ad virtutem,
    ceu _Calcaribus_, 10.

  In _Bargains_, 11.
  let Men deal candidly,
  let them stand to their
  _Covenants_ and _Promises_;
    In _Contractibus_, 11.
    candidè agatur:
    stetur
    _Pactis_ & _Promissis_;
  let _that which is given one to keep_,
  and _that which is lent_,
  be restored:
    _Depositum_,
    & _Mutuum_,
    reddantur:
  let no man be _pillaged_, 12.
  or _hurt_, 13.
  let every one have his own:
  these are the precepts
  of Justice.
    nemo _expiletur_, 12.
    aut _lædatur_, 13.
    suum cuique tribuatur:
    hæc sunt præcepta
    Justitiæ.

  Such things as these are forbidden
  in _God’s 5th._ and _7th._
  _Cammandment_,
  and deservedly punish’d
  on the _Gallows_ and the _Wheel_, 14.
    Talia prohibentur,
    _quinto_ & _septimo Dei_
    _Præcepto_,
    & merito puniuntur
    _Cruce_ ac _Rotâ_, 14.




  CXVII.

  Liberality.
    Liberalitas.

  [Illustration]


  _Liberality_, 1.
  keepeth a mean about _Riches_,
  which she honestly seeketh,
  that she may have
  somewhat to bestow
  on them that _want_, 2.
    _Liberalitas_, 1.
    servat modum circa _Divitias_,
    quas honestè quærit
    ut habeat
    quod largiatur
    _Egenis_, 2.

  She _cloatheth_, 3.
  _nourisheth_, 4.
  and _enricheth_, 5. these
  with a _chearful countenance_, 6.
  and a _winged hand_, 7.
    Hos _vestit_, 3.
    _nutrit_, 4.
    _ditat_, 5.
    _Vultu hilari_, 6.
    & _Manu alatâ_, 7.

  She submitteth her
  _wealth_, 8. to her self,
  not her self to it,
    Subjicit
    _opes_, 8. sibi,
    non se illis,
  as the _covetous man_, 9. doth,
  who hath,
  that he may have,
  and is not the _Owner_,
  but the _Keeper_ of his goods,
    ut _Avarus_, 9.
    qui habet,
    ut habeat,
    & non est _Possessor_
    sed _Custos_ bonorum suorum,
  and being unsatiable,
  always _scrapeth together_, 10.
  with his Nails.
    & insatiabilis,
    semper _corradit_, 10.
    Unguibus suis.

  Moreover he spareth
  and keepeth,
  _hoarding up_, 11.
  that he may always have.
    Sed & parcit
    & adservat,
    _occludendo_, 11.
    ut semper habeat.

  But the _Prodigal_, 12.
  badly spendeth
  things well gotten,
  and at the last wanteth.
    At _Prodigus_, 12.
    malè disperdit
    benè parta,
    ac tandem eget.




  CXVIII.

  Society betwixt Man and Wife.
    Societas Conjugalis.

  [Illustration]


  _Marriage_
  was appointed by God
  in Paradise,
  for mutual _help_,
  and the _Propagation_
  of mankind.
    _Matrimonium_
    institutum est à Deo
    in Paradiso,
    ad mutuum _adjutorium_,
    & _propagationem_
    generis humani.

  _A young man_ (_a single man_)
  being to be married,
  should be furnished
  either with _Wealth_,
  or a _Trade_ and _Science_,
    _Vir Juvenis_ (_Cœlebs_)
    conjugium initurus,
    instructus sit
    aut _Opibus_,
    aut _Arte_ & _Scientiâ_,
  which may serve
  for getting a living;
  that he may be able
  to maintain a _Family_.
    quæ sit
    de pane lucrando;
    ut possit
    sustentare _Familiam_.

  Then he chooseth himself
  a _Maid_ that is _Marriageable_,
  (or a _Widow_)
  whom he loveth;
    Deinde eligit sibi
    _Virginem Nubilem_,
    (aut _Viduam_)
    quam adamat;
  nevertheless a greater Regard
  is to be had of _Virtue_,
  and _Honesty_,
  than of _Beauty_ or _Portion_.
    ubi tamen major ratio
    habenda _Virtutis_
    & _Honestatis_,
    quàm _Formæ_ aut _Dotis_.

  Afterwards, he doth not
  betroth her to himself closely,
  but entreateth for her
  as a _Woer_,
    Posthæc, non
    clam despondet sibi eam,
    sed ambit,
    ut _Procus_,
  first to the _Father_, 1.
  and then the _Mother_, 2.
  or the _Guardians_,
  or _Kinsfolks_, by
  such _as help to make the match_, 3.
    apud _Patrem_, 1.
    & _Matrem_, 2.
    vel apud _Tutores_,
    & _Cognatos_, per
    _Pronubos_, 3.

  When she is espous’d to him,
  he becometh the _Bridegroom_, 4.
  and she the _Bride_, 5.
    Eâ sibi desponsâ,
    fit _Sponsus_, 4.
    & ipsa _Sponsa_, 5.
  and the _Contract_ is made.
  and an _Instrument_ of _Dowry_ 6.
  is written.
    fiuntque _Sponsalia_,
    & scribitur _Instrumentum_
    _Dotale_, 6.

  At the last
  the _Wedding_ is made,
  where they are joined together
  by the _Priest_, 7.
    Tandem
    fiunt _Nuptiæ_
    ubi copulantur
    à _Sacerdote_, 7.
  giving their _Hands_, 8.
  one to another.
  and _Wedding-rings_, 9.
  then they feast with
  the witnesses that are invited.
    datis _Manibus_, 8.
    ultrò citroque,
    & _Annulis Nuptialibus_, 9.
    tum epulantur cum
    invitatis testibus.

  After this they are called
  _Husband_ and _Wife_;
  when she is dead he becometh
  a _Widower_.
    Abhinc dicuntur
    _Maritus_ & _Uxor_;
    hâc mortuâ ille fit
    _Viduus_.




  CXIX.

  The Tree of Consanguinity.
    Arbor Consanguinitatis.

  [Illustration]


  In _Consanguinity_
  there touch a _Man_, 1.
  in _Lineal Ascent_,
    _Hominem_, 1.
    _Consanguinitate_ attingunt,
    _in Linea ascendenti_,
  the _Father_
  (the _Father-in-law_), 2.
  and the _Mother_
  (the _Mother-in-law_), 3.
    _Pater_
    (_Vitricus_), 2.
    & _Mater_
    (_Noverca_), 3.
  the _Grandfather_, 4.
  and the _Grandmother_, 5.
  the _Great Grandfather_, 6.
  and the _Great Grandmother_, 7.
    _Avus_, 4.
    & _Avia_, 5.
    _Proavus_, 6.
    & _Proavia_, 7.
  the _great great Grandfather_, 8.
  the _great great Grandmother_, 9.
  the _great great Grandfather’s Father_, 10.
  the _great great Grandmother’s Mother_, 11.
  the _great great Grandfather’s Grandfather_, 12.
  the _great great Grandmother’s Grandmother_, 13.
    _Abavus_, 8.
    & _Abavia_, 9.
    _Atavus_, 10.
    & _Atavia_, 11
    _Tritavus_, 12.
    & _Tritavia_, 13.

  Those beyond these are called
  _Ancestors_, 14....14.
    Ulteriores dicuntur
    _Majores_, 14...14.

  In a _Lineal descent_,
  the _Son_ (_the son-in-law_), 15.
  and the _Daughter_,
  (_the Daughter-in-law_), 16.
    In _Linea descendenti_,
    _Filius_ (_Privignus_), 15.
    & _Filia_ (_Privigna_), 16.
  the _Nephew_, 17.
  and the _Neece_, 18.
  the _Nephews Son_, 19.
  and the _Nephews Daughter_, 20.
    _Nepos_, 17.
    & _Neptis_, 18.
    _Pronepos_, 19.
    & _Proneptis_, 26.
  the _Nephews Nephew_, 21.
  and the _Neeces Neece_, 22.
  the _Nephews Nephews Son_, 23.
  the _Neeces Neeces Daughter_, 24.
  the _Nephews Nephews Nephew_, 25.
  the _Neeces Neeces Neece_, 26.
    _Abnepos_, 21.
    & _Abneptis_, 22.
    _Atnepos_, 23.
    & _Atneptis_, 24.
    _Trinepos_, 25.
    & _Trineptis_, 26.

  Those beyond these are called
  _Posterity_, 27....27.
    Ulteriores dicuntur
    _Posteri_, 27....27.

  In a _Collateral Line_
  are the _Uncle by the Fathers side_, 28.
  and the _Aunt by the Fathers side_, 29.
    In _Linea Collaterali_
    sunt _Patruus_, 28.
    & _Amita_, 29.
  the _Uncle by the Mothers side_, 30.
  and the _Aunt by the Mothers side_, 31.
    _Avunculus_, 30.
    & _Matertera_, 31.
  the _Brother_, 32.
  and the _Sister_, 33.
  the _Brothers Son_, 34.
  the _Sisters Son_, 35.
  and the _Cousin by_
  _the Brother_ and _Sister_, 36.
    _Frater_, 32.
    & _Soror_, 33.
    _Patruelis_, 34.
    _Sobrinus_, 35.
    & _Amitinus_, 36.




  CXX.

  The Society betwixt Parents and Children.
    Societas Parentalis.

  [Illustration]


  _Married Persons_,
  (by the blessing of God)
  have _Issue_,
  and become _Parents_.
    _Conjuges_,
    (ex benedictione Dei)
    suscipiunt _Sobolem_ (Prolem)
    & fiunt _Parentes_.

  The _Father_, 1. begetteth
  and the _Mother_, 2. beareth
  _Sons_, 3. and _Daughters_, 4.
  (sometimes _Twins_).
    _Pater_, 1. generat
    & _Mater_, 2. parit
    _Filios_, 3. & _Filias_, 4.
    (aliquando _Gemellos_).

  The _Infant_, 5.
  is wrapped in
  _Swadling-cloathes_, 6.
  is laid in a _Cradle_, 7.
    _Infans_, 5.
    involvitur
    _Fasciis_, 6.
    reponitur in _Cunas_, 7.
  is suckled by the Mother
  with her _Breasts_, 8.
  and fed with _Pap_, 9.
    lactatur a matre
    _Uberibus_, 8.
    & nutritur _Pappis_, 9.
  Afterwards it learneth
  to go by a _Standing-stool_, 10.
  playeth with _Rattles_, 11.
  and beginneth to speak.
    Deinde discit
    incedere _Seperasto_, 10.
    ludit _Crepundiis_, 11.
    & incipit fari.

  As it beginneth to grow older,
  it is accustomed
  to _Piety_, 12.
  and _Labour_, 13.
  and is chastised, 14.
  if it be not dutiful.
    Crescente ætate,
    adsuescit
    _Pietati_, 12.
    & _Labori_, 13.
    & castigatur, 14.
    si non sit morigerus.

  _Children_ owe to Parents
  Reverence and Service.
    _Liberi_ debent Parentibus
    Cultum & Officium.

  The Father maintaineth
  his Children
  _by taking pains_, 15.
    Pater sustentat
    Liberos,
    _laborando_, 15.




  CXXI.

  The Society betwixt Masters and Servants.
    Societas herilis.

  [Illustration]


  The _Master_
  (_the goodman of the House_), 1.
  hath _Men-servants_, 2.
    _Herus_
    (_Pater familias_), 1.
    habet _Famulos_ (_Servos_), 2.
  the _Mistress_
  (_the good wife of the House_), 3.
  _Maidens_, 4.
    _Hera_
    (_Mater familias_), 3.
    _Ancillas_, 4.

  They appoint these
  their _Work_, 6.
  and divide
  _them their tasks_, 5. which
  are faithfully to be done by them
    Illi mandant his
    _Opera_, 6.
    & distribuunt
    _Laborum Pensa_, 5. quæ
    ab his fideliter sunt exsequenda
  without murmuring
  and loss:
  for which
  their _Wages_, and _Meat_ and _Drink_
  is allowed them.
    sine murmure
    & dispendio;
    pro quo
    _Merces_ & _Alimonia_
    præbentur ipsis.

  A _Servant_ was heretofore
  a _Slave_,
  over whom the Master
  had power of life and death.
    _Servus_ olim erat
    _Mancipium_,
    in quem Domino
    potestas fuit vitæ & necis

  At this day the poorer sort
  serve in a free manner,
  being hired for Wages.
    Hodiè pauperiores
    serviunt liberè,
    conducti mercede.




  CXXII.

  A City.
    Urbs.

  [Illustration]


  Of many Houses
  is made a _Village_, 1.
  or a _Town_, or a _City_, 2.
    Ex multis Domibus
    fit _Pagus_, 1.
    vel _Oppidum_, vel _Urbs_, 2.

  That and this are fenced
  and begirt with a _Wall_, 3.
  a _Trench_, 4.
  _Bulwarks_, 5.
  and _Pallisadoes_, 6.
    Istud & hæc muniuntur
    & cinguntur _Mœnibus_ (_Muro_), 3.
    _Vallo_, 4.
    _Aggeribus_, 5.
    & _Vallis_, 6.

  Within the Walls is
  the _void Place_, 7.
  without, the _Ditch_, 8.
    Intra muros est
    _Pomœrium_, 7.
    extrà, _Fossa_, 8.

  In the Walls are
  _Fortresses_, 9.
  and _Towers_, 10.
  _Watch-Towers_, 11. are
  upon the higher places.
    In mœnibus sunt
    _Propugnacula_, 9.
    & _Turres_, 10.
    _Specula_, 11. extant
    in editioribus locis.

  The entrance into a City
  is made out of the _Suburbs_, 12.
  through _Gates_, 13.
  over the _Bridge_, 14.
    Ingressus in Urbem
    fit ex _Suburbio_, 12.
    per _Portam_, 13.
    super _Pontem_, 14.

  The _Gate_ hath
  a _Portcullis_, 15.
  a _Draw-bridge_, 16.
  _two-leaved Doors_, 17.
    _Porta_ habet
    _Cataractas_, 15.
    _Pontem versatilem_, 16.
    _Valvas_, 17.
  _Locks_ and _Bolts_,
  as also _Barrs_, 18.
    _Claustra_ & _Repagula_,
    ut & _Vectes_, 18.

  In the Suburbs are
  _Gardens_, 19.
  and _Garden-houses_, 20.
  and also _Burying-places_, 21.
    In Suburbiis sunt
    _Horti_, 19.
    & _Suburbana_, 20.
    ut & _Cœmeteria_, 21.




  CXXIII.

  The inward parts of a City.
    Interiora Urbis.

  [Illustration]


  Within the City are
  _Streets_, 1.
  paved with Stones;
    Intra urbem sunt
    _Plateæ_ (Vici), 1.
    stratæ Lapidibus;
  _Market-places_, 2.
  (in some places with
  _Galleries_), 3.
  and _narrow Lanes_, 4.
    _Fora_, 2.
    (alicubi cum
    _Porticibus_), 3.
    & _Angiportus_, 4.

  The Publick Buildings
  are in the middle of the City,
  the _Church_, 5.
  the _School_, 6.
  the _Guild-Hall_, 7.
  the _Exchange_, 8.
    Publica ædificia
    sunt in medio Urbis,
    _Templum_, 5.
    _Schola_, 6.
    _Curia_, 7.
    _Domus Mercaturæ_, 8.

  About the Walls and the Gates
  are the _Magazine_, 9.
  the _Granary_, 10.
  _Inns_, _Ale-houses_,
    Circa Mœnia, & Portas
    _Armamentarium_, 9.
    _Granarium_, 10.
    _Diversoria_, _Popinæ_,
  _Cooks-shops_, 11.
  the _Play-house_, 12.
  and the _Spittle_, 13.
    & _Cauponæ_, 11.
    _Theatrum_, 12.
    _Nosodochium_, 13.

  In the by-places
  are _Houses of Office_, 14.
  and the _Prison_, 15.
    In recessibus,
    _Foricæ_ (Cloacæ), 14.
    & _Custodia_ (Carcer), 15.

  In the chief Steeple
  is the _Clock_, 16. and
  the _Watchmans_ Dwelling, 17.
    In turre primariâ
    est _Horologium_, 16. &
    habitatio _Vigilum_, 17.

  In the Streets are _Wells_, 18.
    In Plateis sunt _Putei_, 18.

  The _River_, 19. or _Beck_,
  runneth about the City,
  serveth to wash away
  the _filth_.
    _Fluvius_, 19. vel _Rivus_,
    interfluens Urbem,
    inservit eluendis
    _sordibus_.

  The _Tower_, 20.
  standeth in the highest
  part of the City.
    _Arx_, 20.
    extat in summo
    Urbis.




  CXXIV.

  Judgment.
    Judicium.

  [Illustration]


  The best Law, is
  a quiet _agreement_,
  made either by themselves,
  betwixt whom the sute is,
  or by an _Umpire_.
    Optimum Jus, est
    placida _conventio_,
    facta vel ab ipsis,
    inter quos lis est
    vel ab _Arbitro_.

  If this do not proceed,
  they come into _Court_, 1.
  (heretofore they judg’d
  in the Market-place;
  at this day in the _Moot-hall_)
    Hæc si non procedit,
    venitur in _Forum_, 1.
    (olim judicabant
    in Foro,
    hodiè in _Prætorio_)
  in which the _Judge_, 2.
  sitteth with his _Assessors_, 3.
  the _Clerk_, 4. taketh
  their Votes in writing.
    cui _Judex_ (Prætor), 2.
    præsidet cum _Assessoribus_, 3.
    _Dicographus_, 4. excipit
    Vota calamo.

  The _Plaintiff_, 5.
  accuseth the _Defendant_, 6.
  and produceth _Witnesses_, 7.
  against him.
    _Actor_, 5.
    accusat _Reum_, 6.
    & producit _Testes_, 7.
    contra illum.

  The _Defendant_ excuseth
  himself by a _Counsellor_, 8.
    _Reus_ excusat
    se per _Advocatum_, 8.
  whom the Plaintiff’s _Counsellor_, 9.
  contradicts.
    cui Actoris _Procurator_, 9.
    contradicit.

  Then the _Judge_
  pronounceth _Sentence_,
  acquitting the _innocent_,
  and condemning
  him that is _guilty_,
    Tum _Judex_
    _Sententiam_ pronunciat,
    absolvens _insontem_,
    & damnans
    _sontem_
  to a _Punishment_,
  or a _Fine_,
  or _Torment_.
    ad _Pœnam_,
    vel _Mulctam_,
    vel ad _Supplicium_.




  CXXV.

  The Tormenting of Malefactors.
    Supplicia Malefactorum.

  [Illustration]


  _Malefactors_, 1.
  are brought
  from the _Prison_, 3.
  (where they are wont to be tortured)
    _Malefici_, 1.
    producuntur,
    è _Carcere_, 3.
    (ubi torqueri solent)
  by _Serjeants_, 2.
  or _dragg’d with a Horse_, 15.
  to place of _Execution_.
    per _Lictores_, 2.
    vel _Equo raptantur_, 15.
    ad locum _Supplicii_.

  _Thieves_, 4.
  are hanged by the _Hangman_, 6.
  on a _Gallows_, 5.
    _Fures_, 4.
    suspenduntur a _Carnifice_, 6.
    in _Patibulo_, 5.

  _Whoremasters_
  are beheaded, 7.
    _Mœchi_
    decollantur, 7.

  _Murtherers_
  and _Robbers_
    _Homicidæ_ (Sicarii)
    ac _Latrones_ (Piratæ)
  are either laid upon a _Wheel_, 8.
  having their _Legs broken_,
  or fastened upon a _Stake_, 9.
    vel imponuntur _Rotæ_
    _crucifragio plexi_, 8.
    vel _Palo_ infiguntur, 9.

  _Witches_
  are burnt in
  a _great Fire_, 10.
    _Striges_ (Lamiæ)
    cremantur super
    _Rogum_, 10.

  Some before
  they are executed
  have their _Tongues cut out_, 11.
  or have their _Hand_, 12.
  cut off upon a _Block_, 13.
  or are burnt with _Pincers_, 14.
    Quidam antequam
    supplicio afficiantur
    _elinguantur_, 11.
    aut plectuntur _Manu_, 12.
    super _Cippum_, 13.
    aut _Forcipibus_, 14. uruntur

  They that have their Life given them,
  are set on the _Pillory_, 16.
  or _strapado’d_, 17.
    Vitâ donati,
    constringuntur _Numellis_, 16.
    luxantur, 17.
  are set upon
  a _wooden Horse_, 18.
  have their _Ears cut off_, 19.
  are _whipped with Rods_, 20.
    imponuntur
    _Equuleo_, 18.
    _truncantur Auribus_, 19.
    _cæduntur Virgis_, 20.
  are branded,
  are banished,
  are condemned
  to the _Gallies_, or to
  perpetual Imprisonment.
    Stigmate notantur,
    relegantur,
    damnantur
    ad _Triremes_, vel ad
    Carcerem perpetuum.

  _Traytors_ are pull’d in pieces
  with four _Horses_.
    _Perduelles_ discerpuntur
    _Quadrigis_.




  CXXVI.

  Merchandizing.
    Mercatura.

  [Illustration]


  _Wares_
  brought from other places
  are either exchanged
  in an _Exchange_, 1.
    _Merces_,
    aliunde allatæ,
    aliunde vel commutantur
    in _Domo Commerciorum_, 1,
  or exposed to sale
  in _Warehouses_, 2.
  and they are sold
  for _Money_, 3.
    vel exponuntur venum
    in _Tabernis Mercimoniorum_, 2.
    & venduntur
    pro _Pecuniâ_ (monetâ), 3.
  being either measured
  with an _Eln_, 4.
  or weighed in
  a _pair of Balances_, 5.
    vel mensuratæ
    _Ulnâ_, 4.
    vel ponderatæ
    _Librâ_, 5.

  _Shop-keepers_, 6.
  _Pedlars_, 7.
  and _Brokers_, 8.
  would also be called
  _Merchants_, 9.
    _Tabernarii_. 6.
    _Circumforanei_, 7.
    & _Scrutarii_, 8.
    etiam volunt dici
    _Mercatores_, 9.

  The _Seller_
  braggeth of a thing
  that is to be sold,
  and setteth the rate of it,
  and how much
  it may be sold for.
    _Venditor_
    ostentat
    rem promercalem,
    & indicat pretium,
    quanti
    liceat.

  The _Buyer_, 10. cheapneth
  and offereth the price.
    _Emptor_, 10. licetur,
    & pretium offert.

  If any one
  bid _against him_, 11.
  the thing is delivered to him
  that promiseth the most.
    Si quis
    _contralicetur_, 11.
    ei res addicitur
    qui pollicetur plurimum.




  CXXVII.

  Measures and Weights.
    Mensuræ & Pondera.

  [Illustration]


  We measure things that hang together
  with an _Eln_, 1.
  liquid things
  with a _Gallon_, 2.
  and dry things
  by a _two-bushel Measure_, 3.
    Res continuas metimur
    _Ulnâ_, 1.
    liquidas
    _Congio_, 2.
    aridas
    _Medimno_, 3.

  We try the heaviness of things
  by _Weights_, 4.
  and _Balances_, 5.
    Gravitatem rerum experimur
    _Ponderibus_, 4.
    & _Librâ_ (bilance), 5.

  In this is first
  the _Beam_, 6.
  in the midst whereof
  is a little _Axle-tree_, 7.
    In hâc primò est
    _Jugum_ (Scapus), 6.
    in cujus medio
    _Axiculus_, 7.
  above the _cheeks_ and the _hole_, 8.
  in which the _Needle_, 9.
  moveth it self to and fro:
    superiùs _trutina_ & _agina_, 8.
    in quâ _Examen_, 9.
    sese agitat:
  on both sides are
  the _Scales_, 10.
  hanging by _little Cords_, 11.
    utrinque sunt
    _Lances_, 10.
    pendentes _Funiculis_, 11.

  The _Brasiers balance_, 12.
  weigheth things by hanging
  them on a _Hook_, 13.
  and the _Weight_, 14.
  opposite to them which
    _Statera_, 12.
    ponderat res, suspendendo
    illas _Unco_, 13.
    & _Pondus_, 14.
    ex opposito, quod
  in (a) weigheth just as much
  as the thing,
  in (b) twice so much
  in (c) thrice so much, &c.
    in (a) æquiponderat
    rei,
    in (b) bis tantum,
    in (c) ter, &c.




  CXXVIII.

  Physick.
    Ars Medica.

  [Illustration]


  The _Patient_, 1.
  sendeth for a _Physician_, 2.
  who feeleth his _Pulse_, 3,
  and looketh upon his _Water_, 4.
    _Ægrotans_, 1.
    accersit _Medicum_, 2.
    qui tangit ipsius _Arteriam_, 3.
    & inspicit _Urinam_, 4.
  and then prescribeth
  a _Receipt_ in a _Bill_, 5.
    tum præscribit
    _Medicamentum_ in _Schedula_, 5.

  That is made ready
  by an _Apothecary_, 6.
  in a _Apothecaries Shop_, 7.
    Istud paratur
    à _Pharmacopæo_, 6.
    in _Pharmacopolio_, 7.
  where _Drugs_
  are kept in _Drawers_, 8.
  _Boxes_, 9.
  and _Gally-pots_, 10.
    ubi _Pharmaca_
    adservantur in _Capsulis_, 8.
    _Pyxidibus_, 9.
    & _Lagenis_, 10.

  And it is
  either a _Potion_, 11.
  or _Powder_, 12.
  or _Pills_, 13.
  or _Trochisks_, 14.
  or an _Electuary_, 15.
    _Estque_
    vel _Potio_, 11.
    vel _Pulvis_, 12.
    vel _Pillulæ_, 13.
    vel _Pastilli_, 14.
    vel _Electuarium_, 15.

  _Diet_ and _Prayer_, 16.
  is the best _Physick_.
    _Diæta_ & _Oratio_, 16.
    est optima _Medicina_.

  The _Chirurgeon_, 18.
  cureth _Wounds_, 17.
  and _Ulcers_,
  with _Plasters_, 19.
    _Chirurgus_, 18.
    curat _Vulnera_, 17.
    & _Ulcera_,
    _Spleniis_ (emplastris), 19.




  CXXIX.

  A Burial.
    Sepultura.

  [Illustration]


  _Dead Folks_
  heretofore were burned,
  and their Ashes
  put into an _Urn_, 1.
    _Defuncti_
    olim cremabantur,
    & Cineres
    recondebantur in _Urna_, 1.

  We enclose
  our _dead Folks_
  in a _Coffin_, 2.
    Nos includimus
    nostros _Demortuos_
    _Loculo_, (_Capulo_), 2.
  lay them upon a _Bier_, 3.
  and see they be carried out
  in a _Funeral Pomp_
  towards the _Church-yard_, 4.
    imponimus _Feretro_, 3.
    & curamus efferri
    _Pompâ Funebri_
    versus _Cœmeterium_, 4.
  where they are laid
  in a _Grave_, 6.
  by the _Bearers_, 5.
  and are interred;
    ubi inferuntur,
    _Sepulchro_, 6,
    a _Vespillonibus_, 5.
    & humantur;
  this is covered with
  a _Grave-stone_, 7.
  and is adorned
  with _Tombs_, 8.
  and _Epitaphs_, 9.
    hoc tegitur
    _Cippo_, 7.
    & ornatur
    _Monumentis_, 8.
    ac _Epitaphiis_, 9.

  As the Corps go along
  _Psalms_ are sung,
  and the _Bells_ are rung, 10.
    Funere prodeunte,
    _Hymni_ cantantur,
    & _Campanæ_, 10. pulsantur.




  CXXX.

  A Stage-play.
    Ludus Scenicus.

  [Illustration]


  In a _Play-house_, 1.
  (which is trimmed
  with _Hangings_, 2. and
  covered with _Curtains_, 3.)
    In _Theatro_, 1.
    (quod vestitur
    _Tapetibus_, 2. &
    tegitur _Sipariis_, 3.)
  _Comedies_ and _Tragedies_
  are acted,
  wherein memorable things
  are represented;
    _Comediæ_ vel _Tragœdiæ_
    aguntur,
    quibus repræsentantur
    res memorabiles
  as here, the History
  of the _Prodigal Son_, 4.
  and his _Father_, 5.
  by whom he is entertain’d,
  being return’d home.
    ut hic, Historia
    de _Filio Prodigo_, 4.
    & _Patre_, 5. ipsius,
    à quo recipitur,
    domum redux.

  The _Players_ act
  being in disguise;
  the _Fool_, 6. maketh Jests.
    _Actores_ (_Histriones_) agunt
    personati;
    _Morio_, 6. dat Jocos.

  The chief of the Spectators
  sit in the _Gallery_, 7.
  the common sort stand
  on the _Ground_, 8.
    Spectatorum primarii,
    sedent in _Orchestra_, 7.
    plebs stat
    in _Cavea_, 8.
  and clap the hands,
  if anything please them.
    & plaudit,
    si quid arridet.




  CXXXI.

  Sleights.
    Præstigiæ.

  [Illustration]


  The _Tumbler_, 1.
  maketh several _Shows_
  by the nimbleness
  of his body, walking to and fro
  on his hands,
    _Præstigiator_, 1.
    facit varia _Spectacula_,
    volubilitate
    corporis, deambulando
    _manibus_,
  leaping
  through a _Hoop_, 2. &c.
    saliendo
    per _Circulum_, 2. &c.

  Sometimes also
  he _danceth_, 4.
  having on a Vizzard.
    Interdum etiam
    _tripudiat_, 4.
    Larvatus.

  The _Jugler_, 3.
  sheweth _sleights_,
  out of a _Purse_.
    _Agyrta_, 3.
    facit _præstigias_
    è _Marsupio_.

  The _Rope-dancer_, 5.
  goeth and danceth
  upon a _Rope_,
    _Funambulus_, 5.
    graditur & saltat
    super _Funem_,
  holdeth a _Poise_, 6.
  in his hand;
  or hangeth himself
  by the _hand_ or _foot_, 7. &c.
    tenens _Halterem_, 6.
    manu;
    aut suspendit se
    _manu_ vel _pede_, 7. &c.




  CXXXII.

  The Fencing-School.
    Palestra.

  [Illustration]


  _Fencers_
  meet in a Duel
  in a _Fencing-place_,
    _Pugiles_
    congrediuntur Duello
    in _Palestra_,
  fighting with _Swords_, 1.
  or _Pikes_, 2.
  and _Halberds_, 3.
  or _Short-swords_, 4.
    decertantes vel _Gladiis_, 1.
    vel _Hastilibus_, 2.
    & _Bipennibus_, 3.
    vel _Semispathis_, 4.
  or _Rapiers_, 5.
  _having balls at the point_
  (lest they wound
  one another mortally)
  or with _two edged-Swords_
  and a _Dagger_, 6. together.
    vel _Ensibus_, 5.
    _mucronem obligatis_,
    (ne lædet
    lethaliter)
    vel _Frameis_
    & _Pugione_, 6. simul.

  _Wrestlers_, 7.
  (among the Romans
  in time past were nayked
  and anointed with Oyl)
    _Luctatores_, 7.
    (apud Romanos
    olim nudi
    & inuncti Oleo)
  take hold of one another
  and strive whether
  can throw the other,
  especially
  by _tripping up his heels_, 8.
    prehendunt se invicem
    & annituntur uter
    alterum prosternere possit,
    præprimis
    _supplantando_, 8.

  _Hood-winked Fencers_, 9.
  fought with their fists
  in a ridiculous strife,
  to wit, with their Eyes covered.
    _Andabatæ_, 9.
    pugnabant pugnis
    ridiculo certamine,
    nimirum Oculis obvelatis.




  CXXXIII.

  Tennis-play.
    Ludus Pilæ.

  [Illustration]


  In a _Tennis Court_, 1.
  they play with a _Ball_, 2.
  which one throweth,
  and another taketh,
  and sendeth it back
    In _Sphæristerio_, 1.
    luditur _Pilâ_, 2.
    quam alter mittit,
    alter excipit,
    & remittit
  with a _Racket_, 3.
  and that is the Sport
  of Noble Men
  to stir their Body.
    _Reticulo_, 3.
    idque est Lusus
    Nobilium
    ad commotionem Corporis.

  A _Wind-ball_, 4.
  being filled with Air,
  by means of a _Ventil_,
    _Follis_ (pila magna), 4.
    distenta Aere
    ope _Epistomii_,
  is tossed to and fro
  with the _Fist_, 5.
  in the open Air.
    reverberberatur
    _Pugno_, 5.
    sub Dio.




  CXXXIV.

  Dice-play.
    Ludus Aleæ.

  [Illustration]


  We play with _Dice_, 1.
  either they that throw the most
  _take up all_;
    _Tesseris_ (_talis_), 1. ludimus
    vel _Plistobolindam_;
  or we throw them
  through a _Casting-box_, 2.
  upon a _Board_, 3.
  marked with figures,
    vel immittimus illas
    per _Frittillum_, 2.
    in _Tabellam_, 3.
    notatam numeris,
  and this is _Dice-players game_
  at _casting Lots_.
    idque est _Ludas Sortilegii_
    _Aleatorum_.

  Men play by _Luck_ and _Skill_
  at _Tables_.
  in a _pair of Tables_, 4.
  and at _Cards_, 5.
    _Sorte_ & _Arte_ luditur
    _Calculis_
    in _Alveo aleatorio_, 4.
    & _Chartis lusoriis_, 5.

  We play at _Chesse_
  on a _Chesse-board_, 6. where
  only art beareth the sway.
    Ludimus _Abaculis_
    in _Abaco_, 6. ubi
    sola ars regnat.

  The most ingenious Game
  is the Game of _Chesse_, 7.
  wherein as it were
  two Armies
  fight together in Battel.
    Ingeniosissimus Ludus
    est Ludus _Latrunculorum_, 7.
    quo veluti
    duo Exercitus
    confligunt Prælio.




  CXXXV.

  Races.
    Cursus Certamina.

  [Illustration]


  Boys exercise themselves
  by running,
  either upon the _Ice_, 1.
  in _Scrick-shoes_, 2.
  where they are carried also
  upon _Sleds_, 3.
    Pueri exercent se
    cursu,
    sive super _Glaciem_, 1.
    _Diabatris_, 2.
    ubi etiam vehuntur
    _Trahis_, 3.
  or in the open Field,
  making a _Line_, 4.
  which he that desireth to win,
  ought to touch,
  but not to run beyond it.
    sive in Campo,
    designantes _Lineam_, 4.
    quam qui vincere cupit
    debet attingere,
    at non ultrâ procurrere.

  Heretofore _Runners_, 5.
  run betwixt _Rails_, 6.
  to the _Goal_, 7.
    Olim decurrebant _Cursores_, 5.
    inter _Cancellos_, 6.
    ad _Metam_, 7.
  and he that toucheth it first
  receiveth the _Prize_, 8.
  from _him that gave the prize_, 9.
    & qui primum contingebat eam,
    accipiebat _Brabeum_, (_præmium_), 8.
    à _Brabeuta_, 9.

  At this day _Tilting_
  (or the quintain) is used,
    Hodie _Hastiludia_
    habentur,
  (where a _Hoop_, 11.
  is struck at with
  a _Truncheon_, 10.)
  instead of _Horse-races_, which
  are grown out of use.
    (ubi _Circulus_, 11.
    petitur
    _Lancea_, 10.)
    loco _Equiriorum_, quæ
    abierunt in desuetudinem.




  CXXXVI.

  Boys Sport.
    Ludi Pueriles.

  [Illustration]


  _Boys_ use to play
  either with _Bowling-stones_ 1.
  or throwing a _Bowl_, 2.
  at _Nine-pins_, 3.
    _Pueri_ solent ludere
    vel _Globis fictilibus_, 1.
    vel jactantes _Globum_, 2.
    ad _Conas_, 3.
  or striking a _Ball_,
  through a _Ring_, 5.
  with a _Bandy_, 4.
  or scourging a _Top_, 6.
  with a _Whip_, 7.
    vel mittentes _Sphærulam_
    per _Annulum_, 5.
    _Clava_, 4.
    versantes _Turbinem_, 6.
    _Flagello_, 7.
  or shooting with a _Trunk_, 8.
  and a _Bow_, 9. or going
  upon _Stilts_, 10, or
  tossing and swinging themselves
  upon a _Merry-totter_, 11.
    vel jaculantes _Sclopo_, 8.
    & _Arcu_, 9. vel incidentes
    _Grallis_, 10. vel
    super _Petaurum_, 11.
    se agitantes & oscillantes.




  CXXXVII.

  The Kingdom and the Region.
    Regnum & Regio.

  [Illustration]


  Many _Cities_ and _Villages_
  make a _Region_
  and a _Kingdom_.
    Multæ _Urbes_ & _Pagi_
    faciunt _Regionem_
    & _Regnum_.

  The _King_ or _Prince_
  resideth in the _chief City_, 1.
    _Rex_ aut _Princeps_
    sedet in _Metropoli_. 1.
  the _Noblemen_, _Lords_,
  and _Earls_ dwell
  in the _Castles_, 2.
    _Nobiles_, _Barones_,
    & _Comites_ habitant
    in _Arcibus_, 2.
  that lie about it;
  the _Country People_
  dwell in _Villages_, 3.
    circumjacentibus;
    _Rustici_
    in _Pagis_, 3.

  He hath his _toll-places_
  upon _navigable Rivers_, 4.
  and _high-Roads_, 5.
    Habet _telonia sua_
    juxta _Flumina navigabilia_, 4.
    & _Vias regias_, 5.
  where _Portage_ and _Tollage_
  is exacted of them
  that sail
  or travel.
    ubi _Portorum_ & _Vectigal_
    exigitur a
    navigantibus
    & iter facientibus.




  CXXXVIII.

  Regal Majesty.
    Regia Majestas.

  [Illustration]


  The _King_, 1.
  sitteth on his _Throne_, 2.
  in Kingly State,
  with a stately _Habit_, 3.
  crowned with a _Diadem_, 4.
    _Rex_, 1.
    sedet in suo _Solio_, 2.
    in regio splendore,
    magnifico _Habitu_, 3.
    redimitus _Diademate_, 4.
  holding a _Scepter_, 5.
  in his Hand,
  being attended with
  a Company of _Courtiers_.
    tenens _Sceptrum_, 5.
    manu,
    stipatus
    frequentiâ _Aulicorum_.

  The chief among these,
  are the _Chancellor_, 6.
  with the _Counsellors_
  and _Secretaries_,
    Inter hos primarii
    sunt _Cancellarius_, 6.
    cum _Consiliariis_
    & _Secretariis_,
  the _Lord-marshall_, 7.
  the _Comptroller_, 8.
  the _Cup-bearer_, 9.
  the _Taster_, 10.
    _Præfectus Prætorii_, 7.
    _Aulæ Magister_, 8.
    _Pocillator_ (pincerna), 9.
    _Dapifer_, 10.
  the _Treasurer_, 11.
  the _High Chamberlain_, 12.
  and the _Master of the Horse_, 13.
    _Thesaurarius_, 11.
    _Archi-Cubicularius_, 12.
    & _Stabuli Magister_, 13.

  There are subordinate
  to these
  the _Noble Courtiers_, 14.
  the _Noble Pages_, 15.
    Subordinantur
    his
    _Nobiles Aulici_, 14.
    _Nobile Famulitium_, 15.
  with the _Chamberlains_,
  and _Lacquies_, 16.
  the _Guard_, 17.
  with their _Attendance_.
    cum _Cubiculariis_,
    & _Cursoribus_, 16.
    _Stipatores_, 17.
    cum _Satellitio_.

  He solemnly giveth Audience
  to the _Ambassadors_
  of Foreign Princes, 18.
    Solemniter recipit
    _Legatos_
    exterorum, 18.

  He sendeth
  his _Vice-gerents_,
  _Deputies_,
  _Governors_, _Treasurers_,
  and _Ambassadors_
    Ablegat
    _Vicarios_ suos,
    _Administratores_,
    _Præfectos_, _Quæstores_,
    & _Legatos_,
  to other places,
  to whom he sendeth
  new _Commissions_
  ever and anon by the _Posts_, 19.
    aliorsum,
    quibus mittit
    _Mandata nova_
    subinde per _Veredarios_, 19.

  The _Fool_, 20.
  maketh Laughter
  by his toysom Actions.
    _Morio_, 20.
    movet Risum
    ludicris Actionibus.




  CXXXIX.

  The Soldier.
    Miles.

  [Illustration]


  If we be to make War
  _Soldiers_ are lifted, 1.
    Si bellandum est
    scribuntur _Milites_. 1.

  Their _Arms_ are
  a _Head-piece_, 2.
  (which is adorned with
  a _Crest_) and the _Armour_,
    Horum _Arma_ sunt,
    _Galea_ (Cassis, 2.)
    (quæ ornatur
    _Cristâ_) & _Armatura_,
  whose parts are a _Collar_, 3.
  a _Breast-plate_, 4.
  _Arm-pieces_, 5.
  _Leg-pieces_, 6.
  _Greaves_, 7.
    cujus partes _Torquis ferreus_, 3.
    _Thorax_, 4.
    _Brachialia_, 5.
    _Ocreæ ferreæ_, 6.
    _Manicæ_, 7.
  with a _Coat of Mail_, 8.
  and a _Buckler_, 9.
  these are the defensive Arms.
    cum _Lorica_, 8.
    & _Scuto_ (Clypeo), 9.
    hæc sunt Arma defensiva.

  The offensive are
  a _Sword_, 10.
  a _two-edged Sword_, 11.
  a _Falchion_, 12.
    Offensiva sunt
    _Gladius_, 10.
    _Framea_, 11.
    & _Acinaces_, 12.
  which are put up into
  a _Scabbard_, 13.
  and are girded with
  a _Girdle_, 14. or _Belt_, 15.
    qui reconduntur
    _Vaginâ_, 13.
    accinguntur
    _Cingulo_, 14. vel _Baltheo_, 15.
  (a _Scarf_, 16.
  serveth for ornament)
  a _two handed-Sword_, 17.
  and a _Dagger_, 18.
    (_Fascia militaris_, 16.
    inservit ornatui)
    _Romphæa_, 17.
    & _Pugio_, 18.

  In these is the _Haft_, 19.
  with the _Pummel_, 20.
  and the _Blade_, 21.
  having a _Point_, 22.
    In his est _Manubrium_, 19.
    cum _Pomo_, 20.
    & _Verutum_, 21.
    _Cuspidatum_, 22.
  in the middle are
  the _Back_, 23.
  and the _Edge_, 24.
    in medio
    _Dorsum_, 23.
    & _Acies_, 24.

  The other Weapons are
  a _Pike_, 25. a _Halbert_, 26.
    Reliqua arma sunt
    _Hasta_, 25. _Bipennis_, 26.
  (in which is the _Haft_, 27.
  and the _Head_, 28.)
  a _Club_, 29. and a _Whirlebat_, 30.
    (in quibus _Hastile_, 27.
    & _Mucro_, 28.)
    _Clava_, 29. & _Cœstus_, 30.

  They fight at a distance
  with _Muskets_, 31.
  and _Pistols_, 32. which
    Pugnatur eminùs
    _Bombardis_ (Sclopetis), 31.
    & _Sclopis_, 32. quæ
  are charged with _Bullets_, 33.
  out of a _Bullet-bag_, 34.
  and with _Gun-powder_
  out of a _Bandalier_, 35.
    onerantur _Globis_, 33.
    è _Theca bombardica_, 34.
    & _Pulvere nitrato_
    è _Pyxide pulveraria_, 35.




  CXL.

  The Camps.
    Castra.

  [Illustration]


  When a _Design_ is undertaken
  the _Camp_, 1. is pitched
    _Expeditione_ susceptâ,
    _Castra_, 1. locantur
  and the _Tents_
  of _Canvas_, 2. or _Straw_, 3.
  are fastned with _Stakes_;
    & _Tentoria_
    _Linteis_, 2. vel _Stramentis_, 3.
    figuntur _Paxillis_;
  and they entrench them about
  for security’s sake,
  with _Bulwarks_, 4.
  and _Ditches_, 5.
    eaque circumdant,
    securitatis gratiâ
    _Aggeribus_, 4.
    & _Fossis_, 5.
  _Sentinels_, 6. are also set;
  and _Scouts_, 7. are sent out.
    _Excubiæ_, 6. constituuntur;
    & _Exploratores_, 7. emittuntur.

  _Sallyings out_, 8.
  are made for Forage
  and Plunder-sake,
  where they often cope with
  the _Enemy_, 9. in skirmishing.
    _Excursiones_, 8.
    fiunt Pabulationis
    & Prædæ causâ,
    ubi sæpius confligitur cum
    _Hostibus_, 9. velitando.

  The _Pavilion_
  of the _Lord General_ is in
  the midst of the _Camp_, 10.
    _Tentorium_
    _summi Imperatoris_ est in
    medio _Castrorum_, 10.




  CXLI.

  The Army and the Fight.
    Acies & Prœlium.

  [Illustration]


  When the _Battel_
  is to be fought
  the _Army_ is set in order, and
  divided into the _Front_, 1.
  the _Rere_, 2.
  and the _Wings_, 3.
    Quando _Pugna_
    committenda est,
    _Acies_ instruitur, &
    dividitur in _Frontem_, 1.
    _Tergum_, 2.
    & _Alas_ (_Cornua_), 3.

  The _Foot_, 4.
  are intermixed
  with the _Horse_, 5.
    _Peditatus_, 4.
    intermiscetur
    _Equitatui_, 5.

  That is divided
  into _Companies_,
  this into _Troops_.
    Ille distinguitur
    in _Centurias_,
    hic in _Turmas_.

  These carry _Banners_, 6.
  those _Flags_, 7.
  in the midst of them.
    Illæ in medio
    ferunt _Vexilla_, 6.
    hæ _Labara_, 7.

  Their Officers are,
  _Corporals_, _Ensigns_,
  _Lieutenants_, _Captains_, 8.
    Eorum Præfecti sunt,
    _Decuriones_, _Signiferi_,
    _Vicarii_, _Centuriones_, 8.
  _Commanders of the Horse_, 9.
  _Lieutenant Colonels_,
  _Colonels_,
  and he that is the chief of all,
  the _General_.
    _Magistri Equitum_, 9.
    _Tribuni_,
    _Chiliarchæ_,
    & summus omnium
    _Imperator_.

  The _Drummers_, 10.
  and the _Drumslades_, 11.
  as also the _Trumpeters_, 12.
  call to Arms,
  and inflame the Soldier.
    _Tympanistæ_, 10.
    & _Tympanotribæ_, 11.
    ut & _Tubicines_, 12.
    vocant ad Arma
    & inflammant Militem.

  At the first Onset
  the _Muskets_, 13. and
  _Ordnance_, 14. are shot off.
    Primo Conflictu,
    _Bombardæ_, 13. &
    _Tormenta_, 14. exploduntur.

  Afterwards they fight, 15.
  hand to hand
  with _Pikes_ and _Swords_.
    Postea pugnatur, 15.
    cominus
    _Hastis_ & _Gladiis_.

  _They that are overcome_
  are _slain_, 16.
  or taken prisoners,
  or _run away_, 17.
    _Victi_
    _trucidantur_, 16.
    vel capiuntur,
    vel _aufugiunt_, 17.

  _They that are for the Reserve_, 18.
  come upon them
  out of their _places where_
  _they lay in wait_.
    _Succenturiati_, 18.
    superveniunt
    ex _insidiis_.

  The _Carriages_, 19.
  are plundered.
    _Impedimenta_, 19.
    spoliantur.




  CXLII.

  The Sea-Fight.
    Pugna Navalis.

  [Illustration]


  A _Sea-fight_
  is terrible,
  when huge _Ships_,
  like _Castles_,
  run one upon another
    _Navale prœlium_
    terribile est,
    quum ingentes _Naves_,
    veluti _Arces_,
    concurrunt
  with their _Beaks_, 1.
  or shatter one another
  with their _Ordnance_, 2.
    _Rostris_, 1.
    aut se invicem quassant
    _Tormentis_, 2.
  and so being bored thorow
  they drink in
  their own Destruction,
  and are _sunk_, 3.
    atque ita perforatæ,
    imbibunt
    perniciem suam
    & _submerguntur_, 3.

  Or when they are set on fire
  and either by the firing
  of _Gun-powder_, 4.
    Aut quum igne corripiuntur,
    & vel ex incendio
    _pulveris tormentarii_, 4.
  men are blown up into the air,
  or are burnt in
  the midst of the waters,
  or else leaping into
  the Sea are drowned.
    homines ejiciuntur in ærem,
    vel exuruntur in
    mediis aquis,
    vel etiam desilientes
    in mare, suffocantur.

  A _Ship_ that flieth away, 5.
  is overtaken
  by those that _pursue her_, 6.
  and is taken.
    _Navis_ fugitiva, 5.
    intercipitur
    ab _insequentibus_, 6.
    & capitur.




  CXLIII.

  The Besieging of a City.
    Obsidium Urbis.

  [Illustration]


  A _City_ that
  is like to endure a _Siege_,
  is first summoned
  by a _Trumpeter_, 1.
  and persuaded to _yield_.
    _Urbs_
    passura _Obsidionem_,
    primum provocatur
    per _Tubicinem_, 1.
    & invitatur ad _Depitionem_.

  Which if it refuseth to do,
  it is assaulted by the Besiegers,
  and taken by storm.
    Quod si abnuat facere,
    oppugnatur ab Obsidentibus
    & occupatur.

  Either by climbing over
  the walls with _Scaling-ladders_, 2.
  or breaking them down
  with _Battering-engins_, 3.
    Vel muros per _Scalas_, 2.
    transcendendo,
    aut diruendo
    _Arietibus_, 3.
  or demolishing them
  with _great Guns_, 4.
  or breaking through
  the Gates with a _Petarr_, 5.
    aut demoliendo
    _Tormentis_, 4.
    vel dirumpendo
    portas _Exostra_, 5.
  or casting _Granadoes_, 6.
  out of _Mortar-pieces_, 7.
  into the City,
  by _Engineers_, 8.
    vel ejaculando _Globos Tormentarios_, 6.
    e _Mortariis_ (_balistis_), 7.
    in Urbem
    per _Balistarios_, 8.
  (who lye behind
  _Leagure-baskets_, 9.)
  or overthrowing it with
  _Mines_ by _Pioneers_, 10.
    (qui latitant post
    _Gerras_, 9.)
    vel subvertendo
    _Cuniculis_ per _Fossores_, 10,

  _They that are besieged_
  defend themselves
  from the _Walls_, 11.
  with fire and stones, &c,
  or _break out by force_, 12.
    _Obsessi_
    defendunt se
    de _Muris_, 11.
    ignibus, lapidibus, &c.
    aut _erumpunt_, 12.

  A _City_
  _that is taken by Storm_
  is plundered,
  destroyed,
  and sometimes laid even
  with the ground.
    _Urbs_
    _vi expugnata_,
    diriditur,
    exciditur,
    interdum equatur
    solo.




  CXLIV.

  Religion.
    Religio.

  [Illustration]


  _Godliness_, 1.
  the Queen of Vertues,
  _worshippeth God_, 4. devoutly,
    _Pietas_, 1.
    Regina Virtutum
    _colit Deum_, 4. humiliter,
  the Knowledge of God
  being drawn either from
  the _Book of Nature_, 2.
  (for the work commendeth
  the Work-master)
    Notitiâ Dei,
    haustâ vel ex
    _Libro Naturæ_, 2.
    (nam opus commendat
    Artificem)
  or from
  the _Book of Scripture_, 3.
  she meditateth upon
  his Commandments contained
  in the _Decalogue_, 5.
    vel ex
    _Libro Scripturæ_, 3.
    recolit
    Mandata ejus comprehensa
    in _Decalogo_, 5.
  and treading Reason under foot,
  that _Barking Dog_, 6.
  she giveth _Faith_, 7.
  and assent
  to the Word of God,
    & conculcans Rationem,
    _oblatrantem Canem_, 6.
    præbet _Fidem_, 7.
    & assensum
    Verbo Dei,
  and _calleth_ upon him, 8.
  as a Helper in adversity.
    eumque _invocat_, 8.
    ut Opitulatorem in adversis.

  _Divine Services_
  are done in the _Church_, 9.
  in which are the _Quire_, 10.
  with the _Altar_, 11.
    _Officia Divina_
    fiunt in _Templo_, 9.
    in quo est _Penetrale_ (Adytum, 10.)
    cum _Altari_, 11.
  the _Vestry_, 12.
  the _Pulpit_, 13.
  _Seats_, 14.
  _Galleries_, 15.
  and a _Font_, 16.
    _Sacrarium_, 12.
    _Suggestus_, 13.
    _Subsellia_, 14.
    _Ambones_, 15.
    & _Baptisterium_, 16.

  All men perceive
  that there is a God,
  but all men do not
  rightly know God.
    Omnes homines sentiunt
    esse Deum,
    sed non omnes
    rectè nôrunt Deum.

  Hence are divers _Religions_
  whereof IV. are reckoned
  yet as the chief.
    Hinc diversæ _Religiones_
    quarum IV. numerantur
    adhuc primariæ.




  CXLV.

  Gentilism.
    Gentilimus.

  [Illustration]


  The _Gentiles_ feigned
  to themselves near upon
  XIIM. _Deities_.
    _Gentiles_ finxerunt
    sibi prope
    XIIM. _Numina_.

  The chief of them were
  _Jupiter_, 1. _President_, and
  _petty-God of Heaven_;
    Eorum præcipua erant
    _Jupiter_, 1. _Præses_ &
    _Deaster cœli_;
  _Neptune_, 2. of the Sea;
  _Pluto_, 3. of Hell;
  _Mars_, 4. of War;
  _Apollo_, 5. of Arts;
    _Neptunus_, 2. Maris;
    _Pluto_, 3. Inferni;
    _Mars_, 4. Belli;
    _Apollo_, 5. Artium;
  _Mercury_, 6. of Thieves,
  Merchants,
  and Eloquence;
  _Vulcan_, (_Mulciber_)
  of Fire and Smiths;
    _Mercurius_, 6. Furum,
    Mercatorum,
    & Eloquentiæ;
    _Vulcanus_ (_Mulciber_),
    Ignis & Fabrorum;
  _Æolus_, of Winds:
  and the most obscene of
  all the rest, _Priapus_.
    _Æolus_, Ventorum;
    & obscænissimus,
    _Priapus_.

  They had also
  Womanly Deities:
  such as were _Venus_, 7.
  the Goddess of Loves,
  and Pleasures, with
  her little son _Cupid_, 8.
    Habuerant etiam
    Muliebria Numina;
    qualia fuerunt _Venus_, 7.
    Dea Amorum,
    & Voluptatum, cum
    filiolo _Cupidine_, 8.
  _Minerva_ (_Pallas_), with
  the nine _Muses of Arts_;
  _Juno_, of Riches and Weddings;
    _Minerva_ (_Pallas_), cum
    novem _Musis Artium_;
    _Juno_, Divitiarum & Nuptiarum;
  _Vesta_, of Chastity;
  _Ceres_, of Corn;
  _Diana_, of Hunting,
  and Fortune;
  and besides these _Morbona_,
  and _Febris_ her self.
    _Vesta_, Castitatis;
    _Ceres_, Frumentorum;
    _Diana_, Venationum;
    & Fortuna:
    quin & _Morbona_,
    ac _Febris_ ipsa.

  The _Egyptians_,
  instead of God
  worshipped all sorts
  of Beasts and Plants,
  and whatsoever they saw
  first in the morning.
    _Ægyptii_,
    pro Deo
    colebant omne genus
    Animalium & Plantarum,
    & quicquid conspiciebantur
    primum mane.

  The _Philistines_ offered
  to _Moloch_, 9.
  their Children to be burnt alive,
    _Philistæi_ offerebant
    _Molocho_ (_Saturno_), 9.
    Infantes cremandos vivos.

  The _Indians_, 10. even to this day,
  worship
  the _Devil_, 11.
    _Indi_, 10. etiamnum
    venerantur
    _Cacodæmona_, 11.




  CXLVI.

  Judaism.
    Judaismus.

  [Illustration]


  Yet the true _Worship_
  of the true _God_,
  remained with the _Patriarchs_,
  who lived before
  and after the Flood.
    Verus tamem _Cultus_
    veri _Dei_,
    remansit apud _Patriarchas_,
    qui vixerunt ante
    & post Diluvium.

  Amongst these,
  that Seed of the Woman,
  the _Messias_ of the World,
  was promised to _Abraham_, 1.
    Inter hos,
    Semen illud Mulieris,
    _Messias_ Mundi,
    promissus est _Abrahamo_. 1.
  the Founder of the _Jews_,
  the Father of them that believe:
  and he (being called away
  from the Gentiles)
  with his Posterity,
    Conditori _Judæorum_,
    Patri credentium:
    & ipse (avocatus
    a Gentilibus)
    cum Posteris,
  being marked with the _Sacrament_
  _of Circumcision_, 2.
  made a peculiar people,
  and _Church_ of God.
    notatus _Sacramento_
    _Circumcisionis_, 2.
    constitutus singularis populus,
    & _Ecclesia_ Dei.

  Afterwards God
  gave his _Law_,
  written with his own Finger
  in _Tables of Stone_, 5.
  to this people
  by _Moses_, 3.
  in Mount _Sinai_, 4.
    Postea Deus
    exhibuit _Legem_ suam,
    scriptam Digito suo
    in _Tabulis Lapideis_, 5.
    huic Populo
    per _Mosen_, 3.
    in Monte _Sinai_, 4.

  Furthermore, he ordained
  the eating the _Paschal Lamb_, 6.
  and _Sacrifices_
  to be offered upon an _Altar_, 7.
    Porrò ordinavit
    manducationem _Agni Paschalis_, 6.
    & _Sacrificia_
    offerenda in _Altari_, 7.
  by _Priests_, 8.
  and _Incense_, 9. and commanded
  a _Tabernacle_, 10.
  with the Ark of the Covenant, 11.
  to be made:
    per _Sacerdotes_, 8.
    & _Suffitus_, 9. & jussit
    _Tabernaculum_, 10.
    cum Arca Fœderis, 11.
    fieri:
  and besides,
  a _brazen Serpent_, 12.
  to be set up against
  the biting of Serpents in
  the Wilderness.
    præterea,
    _æneum Serpentem_, 12.
    erigi contra
    morsum Serpentum in
    Deserto.

  All which things
  were _Types_ of the _Messias_
  to come, whom
  the _Jews_ yet look for.
    Quæ omnia
    _Typi_ erant _Messiæ_
    venturi, quem
    _Judæi_ adhuc expectant.




  CXLVII.

  Christianity.
    Christianismus.

  [Illustration]


  The only begotten eternal
  _Son of God_, 3.
    Unigenitus æternus
    _Dei Filius_, 3.
  being promised to
  _our first Parents in Paradise,_
  at the last being conceived
  by the _Holy Ghost_,
    promissus
    _Protoplastis in Paradiso_,
    tandem conceptus
    per _Sanctum Spiritum_
  in the most Holy Womb
  of the _Virgin Mary_, 1.
  of the royal house of _David_
  and clad with humane flesh,
    in sanctissimo utero
    _Virginis Mariæ_, 1.
    de domo regiâ _Davidis_,
    & indutus humanâ carne,
  came into the World
  at _Bethlehem of Judæa_,
  in the extream poverty
  of a _Stable_, 2.
    prodiit in mundum
    _Bethlehemæ Judæâ_,
    in summâ paupertate
    _Stabuli_, 2.
  in the fullness of time,
  _in the year of the world_ 3970,
  but pure from all sin,
    impleto tempore,
    _Anno Mundi_ 3970,
    sed mundus ab omni peccato
  and the name of _Jesus_
  was given him,
  which signifieth a _Saviour_.
    & nomen _Jesu_
    impositum fuit ei,
    quod significat _Salvatorem_.

  When he was sprinkled
  with _holy Baptism_, 4.
  (the _Sacrament_
  of the _new Covenant_)
  by _John_ his Forerunner, 5.
    Hic, cum imbueretur
    _sacro Baptismo_, 4.
    (_Sacramento_
    _novi Fœderis_)
    à _Johanne_ præcursore suo, 5.
  in _Jordan_,
  the most sacred _Mystery_
  of the divine _Trinity_,
  appear’d
  by the _Father’s_ voice, 6.
    in _Jordane_
    apparuit
    sacratissimum _Mysterium_
    Divinæ _Trinitatis_,
    _Patris_ voce, 6.
  (whereby he testified
  that this was his _Son_)
  and the _Holy Ghost_
  in the shape of a _Dove_, 7.
  coming down from Heaven.
    (quâ testabatur
    hunc esse _Filium_ suum)
    & _Spiritu sancto_
    in specie _Columbæ_, 7.
    delabente cœlitus.

  From that time,
  being the 30th year of his Age,
  unto the fourth year,
  he declared who he was,
    Ab eo tempore,
    tricesimo anno ætatis suæ,
    usque an annum quartum,
    declaravit quis esset,
  his words and works
  manifesting his Divinity,
  being neither owned,
  nor entertained by the _Jews_,
  because of his voluntary poverty.
    verbis & operibus
    præ se ferentibus Divinitatem,
    nec agnitus,
    nec acceptus a _Judæis_,
    ob voluntariam paupertatem.

  He was at last taken by
  these (when he had first
  instituted the _Mystical Supper_, 8.
  _of his Body and Blood_
    Captus tandem ab
    his (quum prius
    instituisset _Cœnam Mysticam_, 8.
    _Corporis_ & _Sanguinis sui_,
  for a Seal
  of the _new Covenant_ and
  the remembrance of himself)
    in Sigillum
    _novi Fœderis_, &
    sui recordationem)
  carried to the _Judgment-seat_
  _of Pilate_,
  Governour under _Cæsar_,
  accused and condemned
  as an innocent _Lamb_;
    raptus ad _Tribunal_
    _Pilati_,
    Præfecti _Cæsarei_,
    accusatus & damnatus est
    _Agnus_ innocentissimus;
  and being fastned upon a _Cross_, 9.
  _he dyed_, being
  sacrificed upon the Altar
  for the sins of the World.
    actusque in _Crucem_, 9.
    _mortem subiit_,
    immolatus in arâ
    pro peccatis mundi.

  But when he had revived
  by his Divine Power,
  he rose again the third day
  out of the _Grave_, 10.
    Sed quum revixisset
    Divinâ suâ Virtute,
    resurrexit tertia die
    è _Sepulchro_, 10.
  and forty days after
  being taken up
  from _Mount Olivet_, 11.
  into _Heaven_, 12.
    & post dies XL.
    sublatus
    de _Monte Oliveti_, 11.
    in _Cœlum_, 12.
  and returning thither
  whence he came,
  he vanished as it were,
  while the _Apostles_, 13.
  gazed upon him,
    & eo rediens
    unde venerat,
    quasi evanuit,
    _Apostolis_, 13.
    aspectantibus,
  to whom he sent
  his _Holy Spirit_, 14.
  from _Heaven_, the tenth day
  after his _Ascension_,
    quibus misit
    _Spiritum Sanctum_, 14.
    de _Cœlo_, decima die
    post _Ascensum_,
  and them,
  (being filled with his power)
  into the World
  to preach of him;
    ipsos vero,
    (hac virtute impletos)
    in Mundum
    prædicaturos;
  being henceforth to come again
  to the _last Judgment_,
  sitting in the mean time
  at the _right hand_
  _of the Father_,
  and interceding for us.
    olim rediturus
    ad _Judicium extremum_,
    interea sedens
    ad _dextram_
    _Patris_,
    & intercedens pro nobis.

  From this _Christ_
  we are called _Christians_,
  and are saved in him alone.
    Ab hoc _Christo_
    dicimur _Christiani_,
    inque eo solo salvamur.




  CXLVIII.

  Mahometism.
    Mahometismus.

  [Illustration]


  _Mahomet_, 1.
  a warlike Man,
  invented to himself
  a new Religion,
  mixed with _Judaism_,
  _Christianity_ and _Gentilism_,
    _Mahomet_, 1.
    Homo bellator,
    excogitabat sibi
    novam Religionem,
    mixtam ex _Judaismo_,
    _Christianismo_ & _Gentilismo_,
  by the advice of a _Jew_, 2.
  and an _Arian Monk_, 3.
  named _Sergius_; feigning,
  whilst he had the _Fit_
  _of the Falling-sickness_,
    consilio _Judæi_, 2.
    & _Monachi Ariani_, 3.
    nomine _Sergii_; fingens,
    dum laboraret _Epilepsia_,
  that the _Archangel Gabriel_
  and the _Holy Ghost_,
  talked with him,
  using a _Pigeon_, 4.
  to fetch Meat
  out of his Ear.
    _Archangelum Gabrielem_,
    & _Spiritum Sanctum_,
    secum colloqui,
    adsuefaciens _Columbam_, 4.
    petere Escam
    ex Aure sua.

  His _Followers_
  refrain themselves
  from _Wine_;
  are circumcised,
  have many _Wives_;
    _Asseclæ_ ejus
    abstinent se
    à _Vino_;
    circumciduntur,
    sunt _Polygami_;
  build _Chapels_, 5.
  from the _Steeples_ whereof,
  they are called to Holy Service
  not by _Bells_,
  but by a _Priest_, 6.
    exstruunt _Sacella_, 5.
    de quorum _Turriculis_,
    convocantur ad sacra
    non a _Campanis_,
    sed a _Sacerdote_, 6.
  they wash themselves often, 7.
  they deny the _Holy Trinity_:
  they _honour Christ_,
  not as the _Son of God_,
    sæpius se abluunt, 7.
    negant _SS. Trinitatem_:
    _Christum honorant_,
    non ut _Dei Filium_,
  but as a great _Prophet_,
  yet less than _Mahomet_;
  they call their _Law_,
  the _Alchoran_.
    sed ut magnum _Prophetam_,
    minorem tamen _Mahomete_;
    _Legem_ suam vocant
    _Alcoran_.




  CXLIX.

  Gods Providence.
    Providentia Dei.

  [Illustration]


  Mens States
  are not to be attributed
  to _Fortune_ or _Chance_,
  or the _Influence of the Stars_,
    Humanæ Sortes
    non tribuendæ sunt
    _Fortunæ_ aut _Casui_,
    aut _Influxui Siderum_,
  (_Comets_, 1. indeed
  are wont to portend no good)
  but to the provident
  _Eye of God_, 2.
    (_Cometæ_, 1. quidem
    solent nihil boni portendere)
    sed provido
    _Dei Oculo_, 2.
  and to his _governing Hand_, 3.
  even our _Sights_,
  or _Oversights_,
  or even our _Faults_.
    & ejusdem _Manui rectrici_, 3.
    etiam nostræ _Prudentiæ_,
    vel _Imprudentiæ_,
    vel etiam _Noxæ_.

  _God_ hath his _Ministers_
  and _Angels_, 4.
  who accompany a _Man_, 5.
  from his birth,
  as _Guardians_,
  against wicked _Spirits_,
    _Deus_ habet _Ministros_ suos,
    & _Angelos_, 4.
    qui associant se _Homini_, 5.
    à nativitate ejus,
    ut _Custodes_,
    contra malignos _Spiritus_,
  or the _Devil_, 6.
  who every minute
  layeth wait for him,
  to tempt
  and vex him.
    seu _Diabolum_, 6.
    qui minutatim
    struit insidias ei,
    ad tentandum
    vel vexandum.

  Wo to the mad
  _Wizzards_ and _Witches_
  who give themselves to the _Devil_,
  (being inclosed in a _Circle_, 7.
  calling upon him
  with Charms)
    Væ dementibus
    _Magis_ & _Lamiis_
    qui Cacodæmoni se dedunt
    (inclusi _Circulo_, 7.
    eum advocantes
    Incantamentis)
  they dally with him,
  and fall from God!
  for they shall receive
  their reward with him.
    cum eo colludunt
    & à Deo deficiunt!
    nam cum illo
    mercedem accipient.




  CL.

  The Last Judgment.
    Judicium extremum.

  [Illustration]


  For the _last day_
  shall come
  which shall raise up the _Dead_, 2.
  with the sound of a _Trumpet_, 1.
    Nam _dies novissima_
    veniet,
    quæ resuscitabit _Mortuos_, 2.
    voce _Tubæ_, 1.
  and summon the _Quick_
  with them
  to the _Judgment-seat_
  of _Christ Jesus_, 3.
  (appearing in the Clouds)
    & citabit _Vivos_,
    cum illis
    ad _Tribunal_
    _Jesu Christi_, 3.
    (apparentis in Nubibus)
  to give an Account
  of all things done.
    ad reddendam rationem
    omnium actorum.

  When the _Godly_ & _Elect_, 4.
  shall enter into life eternal
  into the place of Bliss,
  and the new _Hierusalem_, 5.
    Ubi _pii_ (_justi_) & _Electi_, 4.
    introibunt in vitam æternam,
    in locum Beatitudinis
    & novum _Hierosolymam_, 5.

  But the _Wicked_
  and the _damned_, 6.
  shall be thrust into _Hell_, 8.
  with the _Devils_, 7.
  to be there tormented for ever.
    _Impii_ vero,
    & _damnati_, 6.
    cum _Cacodæmonibus_, 7.
    in _Gehennum_, 8.
    detrudentur,
    ibi cruciandi æternum.




  CLI.

  The Close.
    Clausula.

  [Illustration]


  Thus thou hast seen in short,
  all things
  that can be shewed,
    Ita vidisti summatim
    res omnes
    quæ poterunt ostendi,
  and hast learned
  the _chief Words_
  of the _English_ and _Latin_
  _Tongue_.
    & didicisti
    _Voces primarias_
    _Anglicæ_ & _Latinæ_
    _Linguæ_.

  Go on now
  and read other good _Books_
  diligently,
  and thou shalt become
  _learned_, _wise_, and _godly_.
    Perge nunc
    & lege diligenter alias
    bonos _Libros_,
    ut fias
    _doctus_, _sapiens_, & _pius_.

  Remember these things;
  fear God, and call upon him,
  that he may bestow
  upon thee
  the _Spirit of Wisdom_.
    Memento horum;
    Deum time, & invoca eum,
    ut largiatur
    tibi
    _Spiritum Sapientiæ_.

  Farewell.
    Vale.




  INDEX TITULORUM.

  Cap.                                                   Pag.

      A.
  141 Acies & Prælium                                    178
    6 Aer                                                 10
   46 Agricultura                                         58
   33 Amphibia                                            40
   43 Animi hominis                                       54
   19 Animalia & _primum_ Aves                            24
    7 Aqua                                                12
   13 Arbor                                               17
  119 Arbor Consanguinitatis                             150
  128 Ars Medica                                         163
   92 Ars Scriptoria                                     112
  100 Artes Sermonis                                     121
   52 Aucupium                                            65
   24 Aves Aquaticæ                                       30
   22 Aves Campestres & Sylvestres                        28
   20 Aves Domesticæ                                      25
   23 Aves Rapaces                                        29

      B.
   75 Balneum                                             91
   96 Bibliopegus                                        117
   95 Bibliopolium                                       116

      C.
   41 Canales & Ossa                                      50
   39 Caput & Manus                                       47
   40 Caro & Viscera                                      49
  140 Castra                                             177
  147 Christianismus                                     187
    4 Cœlum                                                7
   58 Convivium                                           72
   55 Coquinaria                                          68
  135 Cursus Certamina                                   171

      D.
   44 Deformes & Monstrosi                                55
    2 Deus                                                 5
   67 Domus                                               82

      E.
  106 Eclipses                                           131
   84 Eques                                              102
   77 Equile                                             194
  109 Ethica                                              36
  108 Europa                                             134

      F.
   69 Faber Ferrarius                                     85
   64 Faber lignarius                                     79
   65 Faber murarius                                      80
   30 Feræ Bestiæ                                         36
   29 Feræ Pecudes                                        35
   71 Figulus                                             87
   15 Flores                                              20
  113 Fortitudo                                          141
   14 Fructus Arborum                                     18
   17 Fruges                                              22
   18 Frutices                                            23

      G.
  145 Gentilismus                                        184
  103 Geometria                                          126

      H.
   36 Homo                                                43
   78 Horologia                                           95
   45 Hortorum cultura                                    56
  115 Humanitas                                          144
   73 Hypocaustum _cum_ Dormitorio                        89

      I.
    5 Ignis                                                8
   32 Insecta repentia                                    38
   25 Insecta volantia                                    31
  101 Instrumenta Musica                                 123
  123 Interiora Urbis                                    156
    1 Invitatio                                            1
  146 Judaismus                                          186
  124 Judicium                                           157
  150 Jud’m extremum                                     193
   28 Jumenta                                             34
  116 Justitia                                           145

      L.
   12 Lapides                                             15
   54 Lanionia                                            67
   97 Liber                                              118
  117 Liberalitas                                        147
   61 Lintea                                              76
  134 Ludus Aleæ                                         170
  136 Ludi pueriles                                      172
  133 Ludus Pilæ                                         169
  130 Ludus Scenicus                                     166

      M.
   66 Machinæ                                             81
  148 Mahometismus                                       190
   35 Marinæ Pisces & Conchæ                              42
   48 Mellificium                                         61
   38 Membra Hominis Externa                              45
  127 Mensuræ & Pondera                                  162
  126 Mercatura                                          161
   68 Metallifodina                                       84
   11 Metalla                                             15
  139 Miles                                              176
   49 Molitura                                            62
    3 Mundus                                               6
   99 Museum                                             120

      N.
   88 Natatus                                            107
   91 Naufragium                                         111
   89 Navis actuaria                                     108
   90 Navis oneraria                                     109
    8 Nubes                                               12

      O.
  143 Obsidium Urbis                                     181
   16 Olera                                               21
   21 Oscines                                             27

      P.
  132 Palæstra                                           168
   50 Panificium                                          63
   93 Papyrus                                            113
   72 Partes Domus                                        88
  114 Patientia                                          142
   27 Pecora                                              33
   47 Pecuaria                                            59
  105 Phases Lunæ                                        130
  102 Philosophia                                        125
   79 Pictura                                             96
   51 Piscatio                                            64
   34 Pisces Fluviatiles                                  41
  104 Planet. Aspectus                                   129
  131 Præstigiæ                                          167
  149 Providentia Dei                                    191
  110 Prudentia                                          137
  142 Pugna Navalis                                      180
   74 Putei                                               90

      Q.
   26 Quadrupedia & _primum_ Domestica                    32

      R.
  138 Regia Majestas                                     174
  137 Regnum & Regio                                     173
  144 Religio                                            183
   82 Restio & Lorarius                                   99

      S.
   62 Sartor                                              77
   98 Schola                                             119
   70 Scriniarius & Tornator                              86
  111 Sedulitas                                          139
   42 Sensus externi & interni                            52
   37 Septum Ætat. Hominis                                44
  129 Sepultura                                          165
   31 Serpentes & Reptilia                                37
  118 Societas Conjugalis                                144
  121 Societas Herilis                                   153
  120 Soc’tas Parentalis                                 152
   80 Specularia                                          97
  104 Sphæra cœlestis                                    127
  107 Sphæra terrestris                                  132
  125 Supplicia Maleficiorum                             159
   63 Sutor                                               78

      T.
  112 Temperantia                                        140
    9 Terra                                               13
   10 Terræ fœtus                                         14
   60 Textura                                             75
   76 Tonstrina                                           93
   59 Tractio Lini                                        74
   87 Transitus Aqua’m                                   106
   94 Typographia                                        114

      V.
   86 Vectura                                            105
   85 Vehicula                                           103
   53 Venatus                                             66
   83 Viator                                             100
   81 Vietor                                              98
   56 Vindemia                                            70
  122 Urbs                                               144

      Z.
   57 Zythopœia                                           71




  An Index of the Titles.

 Chap.                                                  Page.

       A.
   37 _The Seven Ages of Man_                             44
    6 _The Air_                                           10
   33 _Amphibious Creatures_                              40
  105 _The Apparitions of the Moon_                      130
  141 _The Army and the Fight_                           178
  100 _Arts belonging to Speech_                         121
  104 _The Aspects of the Planets_                       129

       B.
   75 _The Bath_                                          91
   76 _The Barbers Shop_                                  93
   28 _Labouring Beasts_                                  34
   30 _Wild Beasts_                                       36
  143 _The Besieging of a City_                          181
   19 _Birds_                                             24
   22 _Birds that live in the Fields and Woods_           28
   23 _Ravenous Birds_                                    29
   21 _Singing Birds_                                     27
   41 _The Chanels and Bones_                             50
   97 _A Book_                                           118
   96 _The Book-binder_                                  117
   95 _The Book-sellers Shop_                            116
   70 _The Box-maker_                                     86
  136 _Boys Sports_                                      172
   50 _Bread-baking_                                      63
   57 _Brewing_                                           71
  129 _A Burial_                                         165
   54 _Butchery_                                          67

       C.
  104 _The Celestial Sphere_                             127
  140 _The Camp_                                         177
   85 _Carriages_                                        103
   86 _Carrying to and fro_                              105
   64 _The Carpenter_                                     79
   27 _Herd-Cattle_                                       33
   29 _Wild-Cattle_                                       35
   41 _The Chanels and Bones_                             50
  147 _Christianity_                                     187
  123 _A City_                                           154
  143 _The Besieging of a City_                          181
  123 _The Inward parts of a City_                       156
  151 _The Close_                                        194
    8 _The Clouds_                                        12
  119 _The Tree of Consanguinity_                        150
   56 _Cookery_                                           68
   81 _The Cooper_                                        98
   82 _The Cord-wainer_                                   99
   17 _Corn_                                              22
   32 _Crawling Vermin_                                   38
   33 _Creatures that live as well by water as by land_   40
   31 _Creeping things_                                   37

       D.
   44 _Deformed and monstrous People_                     55
   78 _Dials_                                             95
  134 _Dice-play_                                        170
  111 _Diligence_                                        139
   45 _The Dressing of Gardens_                           56

       E.
    9 _The Earth_                                         13
  106 _The Eclipses_                                     131
   66 _Engines_                                           81
  108 _Europe_                                           134

       F.
   58 _A Feast_                                           72
  132 _The Fencing-School_                               168
    5 _Fire_                                               8
   51 _Fishing_                                           64
   34 _River-fish and Pond-fish_                          41
   35 _Sea-fish and Shell-fish_                           43
   40 _The Flesh and Bowels_                              49
   15 _Flowers_                                           20
   25 _Flying Vermin_                                     31
  113 _Fortitude_                                        141
   26 _Four footed Beasts about the House_                32
   52 _Fowling_                                           65
   20 _Tame-Fowl_                                         25
   24 _Water-Fowl_                                        30
   10 _The Fruits of the Earth_                           14
   14 _Fruits of Trees_                                   18

       G.
   89 _A Galley_                                         108
  145 _Gentilism_                                        184
  103 _Geometry_                                         126
    2 _God_                                                5
  149 _God’s Providence_                                 191
   47 _Grasing_                                           59
   49 _Grinding_                                          62

       H.
   39 _The Head and the Hands_                            47
   16 _Pot-herbs_                                         21
   27 _Herd-Cattle_                                       33
    4 _Heaven_                                             7
   48 _The making of Honey_                               61
   84 _The Horseman_                                     102
   67 _A House_                                           82
   72 _The parts of a House_                              88
  115 _Humanity_                                         144
   53 _Hunting_                                           66
   46 _Husbandry_                                         58

       I.
    1 _The Invitation_                                     1
  101 _Musical Instruments_                              123
  146 _Judaism_                                          186
  124 _Judgment_                                         157
  150 _The last Judgment_                                193
  116 _Justice_                                          145

       K.
  137 _The Kingdom and Region_                           173

       L.
   28 _Labouring Beasts_                                  34
  117 _Liberality_                                       147
   19 _Living Creatures_                                  24
   59 _The dressing of Line_                              74
   61 _Linen Cloaths_                                     76
   80 _Looking-glasses_                                   97

       M.
  148 _Mahometism_                                       190
  138 _Kingly Majesty_                                   174
   36 _Man_                                               43
   37 _The Seven Ages of Man_                             44
   38 _The outward parts of a Man_                        45
   65 _The Mason_                                         80
  127 _Measures and Weights_                             162
  126 _Merchandizing_                                    161
   90 _A Merchant Ship_                                  109
   11 _Metals_                                            15
   68 _A Mine_                                            84
  105 _The Apparitions of the Moon_                      137
  109 _Moral Philosophy_                                 136
  101 _Musical Inst’ments_                               123

       P.
   93 _Paper_                                            113
   87 _Passage over Waters_                              106
  114 _Patience_                                         142
  102 _Philosophy_                                       125
  109 _Moral Philosophy_                                 136
  128 _Physick_                                          163
   79 _The Picture_                                       96
   34 _Pond-fish_                                         41
   16 _Pot-herbs_                                         21
   71 _The Potter_                                        87
   94 _Printing_                                         114
  149 _God’s Providence_                                 191
  110 _Prudence_                                         137

       R.
  135 _Races_                                            171
   23 _Ravenous Birds_                                    29
  144 _Religion_                                         183
   34 _River-fish_                                        41
   82 _The Roper_                                         99
  138 _Regal Majesty_                                    174

       S.
   98 _A School_                                         119
  142 _The Sea-fight_                                    180
   35 _Sea-fish and Shell-fish_                           42
   42 _The outward and inward Senses_                     52
   31 _Serpents_                                          37
   91 _Shipwreck_                                        111
   64 _The Shoe-maker_                                    78
   18 _Shrubs_                                            23
   21 _Singing Birds_                                     27
  131 _Sleights_                                         167
  118 _The Society betwixt Man and Wife_                 148
  120 _The Society betwixt Parents and Children_         152
  121 _The Society betwixt Master and Servant_           153
   43 _The Soul of Man_                                   54
  139 _The Souldier_                                     176
   69 _The Black-smith_                                   85
  136 _Boys Sports_                                      172
  104 _The Celestial Sphere_                             127
  107 _The Terrestial Sphere_                            132
  100 _Arts belonging to Speech_                         121
   77 _The Stable_                                        94
  130 _A Stage-play_                                     166
   12 _Stones_                                            16
   73 _The Stove with the Bed-room_                       89
   99 _The Study_                                        120
   88 _Swimming_                                         107

       T.
   62 _The Taylor_                                        77
  112 _Temperance_                                       140
  133 _Tennis play_                                      169
  107 _The Terrestial Sphere_                            132
  125 _The Torments of Malefactors_                      159
   83 _The Travellor_                                    100
   13 _A Tree_                                            17
   70 _The Turner_                                        86

       U.
   25 _Flying Vermin_                                     31
   32 _Crawling Vermin_                                   38
   56 _The Vintage_                                       70

       W.
    7 _The Water_                                         11
   60 _Weaving_                                           75
   74 _Wells_                                             90
   29 _Wild Cattle_                                       35
   30 _Wild Beasts_                                       36
    3 _The World_                                          6
   92 _Writing_                                          112


Trinuni Deo Gloria.

FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors and Inconsistencies (noted by transcriber)

The Editor’s Preface says:

  “The text for the English translation is from the English edition of
  1727, in which for the first time the English words were so arranged
  as to stand opposite their Latin equivalents.”

The 1659 English translation has the same general layout, but word order
within sentences is often different, as explained in the “Advertisement”
to the 1727 edition.

In the 1659 edition the _Invitatio_ and _Clausula_ (Close) are
unnumbered, and in the 1727 edition there are two chapters CIV (104).
Chapter numbers 64 through 104 were off by one (printed as 63-103) in
the 1727 Index.

  Chapter Name
    1659 text
    1727 index
    1727 text
  Invitation
    --
    --
    I (1)
  God
    I (1)
    2
    II (2)
  ...
  Shoemaker
    LXII (62)
    63
    LXIII (63)
  Carpenter
    LXIII (63)
    63
    LXIV (64)
  ...
  Geometry
    CII (102)
    102
    CIII (103)
  Celestial Sphere
    CIII (103)
    103
    CIV (104)
  Aspects of the Planets
    CIV (104)
    104
    CIV (104)
  ...
  The Last Judgement
    CL (150)
    150
    CL (150)
  The Close
    --
    --
    CLI (151)


Errata:

Editor’s Preface [1874]

  but what liberties have been taken with the design  [with with]

Comments Upon ...

  the life and manners of the seventeeth century  [seventeeth]

  n’est qu’un équivalent de la  [equivalent le la]
  fort défectueux  [defectueux]
  pour l’intégrité  [integrité]
  à la pédagogie  [pedagogie]
  livre d’école  [ecole]
  modèle à d’innombrables livres  [modèle á d’innomorables]
  Histoire d’Éducation  [Historie]

The Translator, to All ... [1727]

  many of the Books of this well-deserving Author  [of this of this]

[Footnote]

  Dr. Tabor’s Christian Schoolmaster  [Christain]
  the pious Institutions of Youth, &c.  [final . missing]


Orbis Pictus (Main Text):

Where appropriate, line breaks are shown as “ / ”. All chapter headers
are shown in the form “II. / God. / Deus.” Notes about uncorrected
errors are given in [[double brackets]].

The inconsistent marking of final long â is unchanged.

  The _Wolf_ howleth. / L  [[missing lower-case l]]
  [XI] _Ducats_ and _Crown-pieces_, 8. / of Gold.
    [_Words “of Gold” printed at end of page, after “thorow Metals”._]
  [XV] alba & lutea, & cœrulea, 5.  [[spelling unchanged]]
  [XIX] here the King’s _Fisher_, 1.
    [_printed text has “_Fisher_, 1. here the King’s”:
    the 1659 text has “here the King’s Fisher” with the word “Fisher”
    overflowing onto the preceding line, after “Bird”_]
  [XXII] _Upupa_, 4. / sordidissimus  [sordidssimus]
  [XXIV] Add to these the water-hen,  [And to]
  XXX. / Wild-Beasts. / Feræ Bestiæ.  [Besitæ.]
  [XXXI] _Cæcilia_, 6. / est cœca.  [[inconsistent spelling unchanged]]
  [XXXV] _Raia_, 3. / monstrosissimus  [monstrossimus]
  [XXXVI] Hi, seducti à _Diabolo_
    [_Printed “seducti _abolo_”; missing text supplied from 1659
    edition._]
  [XXXVIII] The _Loyns_  [[17. missing]]
  [XLI] (carrying) / _Heart_ and _Life_ / from the _Heat_;
    [_Printed as shown, with “Heart” and “Heat” reversed_]
  The _Thigh-bone_, 14.; _Tibia_, 14.
    [_Text unchanged; 14. in the illustration is the thigh or femur.
    1659 edition is the same_]
  [XLIV] ut sunt, immanis _Gigas_  [[1. missing]]
  [XLVII] the _Udders_ / of the _Cow_, 15.  [[error for 14.]]
  [XLIX] In _Mola_,  [[1. missing]]
  LVII. / Brewing. / Zythopœia.  [Zythopie]
    [_Spelling changed to agree with Index and 1659 form._]
  [LXV] by means of a _Trowel_  [[7. missing]]
  [LXVI] _Ærumna_  [[4. missing]]
  _Palangâ_  [[1. missing]]
  [LXVII]  by _Greeses_, 14.  [Greess]
  per _Scalas_, 14. / & _Cochlidia_, 15.  [Cocklidia]
  [LXVIII] _Scoriæ_, 11. / abjiciuntur seorsim  [scorsim]
  [LXXI] _Figulus_, 1.  [Figulas]
  [LXXII] the _Kitchen_, 3. / _Culina_, 3.
    [_Missing Latin line supplied from 1659 edition._]
  adservandis illis  [adfervandis]
  [LXXIV] aut denique / _Antliâ_, 11.  [deinque]
  [LXXVII] _Stabularius_ (Equiso), 1.  [Stabularias]
  eâque pascit equum  [câque]
  LXXVIII. / Dials. / Horologia  [LXXVII.]
    [[See also note about chapter numbering.]]
  [LXXIX] The _Painter_, 2.  [Puinter]
  [LXXXIII] Non deserat / Viam regiam  [[9. missing]]
  [LXXXVI] _Horse Litters_, 16, 17.  [Liiters]
  [XCI] upon the Shoars.  [oupn]
  [XCVI] beateth with a hammer, 4.  [beatheth]
  [XCIX] fœtet & fumigat  [fugimat]
  [C] componit varia / _Carmina_ & _Hymnos_  [componi]
  [CIV] ♑ _Capricorn_ [Capricor]  [[on English side]]
  quorum via est Circulvs  [[v for u unchanged]]
  CIV. / The Celestial Sphere. / Sphera cælestis.
  CIV. / The Aspects of the Planets. / Planetarum Aspectus.
    [[Duplicate chapter numbers: see note about chapter numbering.]]
  [CX] She proposeth ... _End_, / to her Actions.
  Actionibus suis / præfigit _Scopum_ ...
    [[Text shown as printed. The first Latin line corresponds to the
    last English line.]]
  [CXII] _Revellers_ ... babble; _Heluones_ ... rixantur
    [[1659 edition has “brabble”, meaning “quarrel” or “brawl”.]]
  [CXVI] Talia prohibentur  [Talio]
  [CXXI] _Laborum Pensa_, 5. quæ  [qua]
  [CXXXII] with their Eyes covered  [coverered]
  [CXXXVIII] his _Vice-gerents_  [_text unchanged: rare word_]
  [CXLVII] ob voluntariam paupertatem  [pauperatem]

Punctuation

In chapters CII, CV, CVIIb and CXIX, number pairs were printed with two
to four dots based on available space in the line. For this e-text they
have been regularized to four: “9....9”.

Punctuation errors were corrected in chapter headings, where readers may
need the exact format for text searches:

  II. / God. / Deus.  [God]
  XL. / The Flesh and Bowels. / Caro & Viscera.  [XL]
  XLIX. / Grinding. / Molitura.  [Molitura]
  LXXII. / The Parts of a House. / Partes Domus.  [... Domus]
  LXXIX. / The Picture. / Pictura.  [LXXIX,]
  LXXXV. / Carriages. / Vehicula.  [LXXXV]
  LXXXVII. / Passing over Waters. / Transitus Aquarum.  [... Aquarum]
  CXIX. / The Tree of Consanguinity. / Arbor Consanguinitatis.
    [... Consanguinity,]
  CXXVIII. / Physick. / Ars Medica.  [Physick]

Indexes

See note on chapter numbering, above. In both Indexes, chapter
references 64-104 were off by one (printed as 63-103) and have been
silently corrected. Only those with additional errors are individually
noted. All page numbers are correct as printed. Minor differences in
spelling and hyphenization are not noted.

Index: Latin

The chapter number for _Invitatio_ (1) was missing, and there is no
entry for _Clausula_ (151).

   58 Convivium  [53 for 58]
   67 Domus  [96 for expected 66]
   88 Natatus  [17 for expected 87; Natats]
   96 Bibliopegus  [Bibilopegus]
    S.  [_letter header missing_]
  104 Sphæra cœlestis
  107 Sphæra terrestris  [[both spelled “Sphera” in body text]]

Index: English

Chapter numbers for _The Invitation_ (1) and _The Close_ (151) were
missing.

   22 _Birds that live in the Fields and Woods_
    [[body text has “Birds that haunt the ...”]]
   56 _Cookery_  [55]
   87 _Passage over Waters_  [16 for expected 86]
  100 _Musical Instruments_  [Insruments]
  112 _Temperance_  [182]
  131 _Sleights_  [121]
  136 _Boys Sports_  [126]
  138 _Regal Majesty_  [[Alphabetized as if “Royal”.]]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Orbis Pictus, by John Amos Comenius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ORBIS PICTUS ***

***** This file should be named 28299-0.txt or 28299-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/9/28299/

Produced by Louise Hope, Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
