The Project Gutenberg EBook of North American Yellow Bats, 'Dasypterus,'
And a List of the Named Kinds Of the Genus Lasiurus Gray, by E. Raymond Hall and J. Knox Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: North American Yellow Bats, 'Dasypterus,' And a List of the Named Kinds Of the Genus Lasiurus Gray

Author: E. Raymond Hall
        J. Knox Jones

Release Date: March 17, 2010 [EBook #31679]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN YELLOW BATS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 14, No. 5, pp. 73-98, 4 figs.
December 29, 1961




North American Yellow Bats, "Dasypterus,"
And a List of the Named Kinds
Of the Genus Lasiurus Gray

By

E. RAYMOND HALL AND J. KNOX JONES, JR.


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1961



UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch, Theodore H. Eaton,
Jr.

Volume 14, No. 5, pp. 73-98, 4 figs.
Published December 29, 1961

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
JEAN M. NEIBARGER, STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1961




North American Yellow Bats, "Dasypterus,"
And a List of the Named Kinds
Of the Genus Lasiurus Gray

BY

E. RAYMOND HALL AND J. KNOX JONES, JR.




INTRODUCTION


Yellow bats occur only in the New World and by most recent authors have
been referred to the genus _Dasypterus_ Peters. The red bats and the
hoary bat, all belonging to the genus _Lasiurus_ Gray, also occur only
in the New World except that the hoary bat has an endemic subspecies in
the Hawaiian Islands.

The kind of yellow bat first to be given a distinctive name was the
smaller of the two species that occur in North America. It was named
_Nycticejus ega_ in 1856 (p. 73) by Gervais on the basis of material
from the state of Amazonas, Brazil, South America, but was early
recognized as occurring also in North America (in the sense that México
and Central America, including Panamá, are parts of North America).
More than 40 years elapsed before subspecific names were proposed for
the North American populations; Thomas named _Dasypterus ega xanthinus_
in 1897 (p. 544) from Baja California, and _Dasypterus ega panamensis_
in 1901 (p. 246) from Panamá.

The larger of the two North American species was named _Lasiurus
intermedius_ in 1862 (p. 246) by H. Allen on the basis of material from
extreme northeastern México. Another alleged species, _Dasypterus
floridanus_, was named in 1902 (p. 392) by Miller from Florida, but as
set forth below it is only a subspecies of _L. intermedius_, a species
that is seemingly limited to parts of the North American mainland and
Cuba.

A third species, _Atalapha egregia_, allegedly allied to the small
yellow bat, _L. ega_, was named in 1871 (p. 912) by Peters from Santa
Catarina, Brazil, but Handley (1960:473) thinks that _L. egregius_ is
allied instead to the red bats. The species _L. egregius_ has not been
studied in connection with the observations reported below.

Bats of the genus concerned were given the generic name _Nycteris_ by
Borkhausen in 1797 (p. 66), and the name _Lasiurus_ by Gray in 1831 (p.
38). For much of the latter part of the 19th century the generic name
_Atalapha_ proposed by Rafinesque in 1814 (p. 12) was used because it
antedated the name _Lasiurus_. In this period Harrison Allen (1894:137)
raised to generic rank the name _Dasypterus_ that had been proposed by
Peters in 1871 (p. 912) only as a subgenus for the yellow bats. Since
1894 the yellow bats ordinarily have borne the generic name
_Dasypterus_. The red bats and the hoary bat continued to be referred
to as of the genus _Atalapha_ until early in the 20th century when it
was decided that a European bat of another genus was technically the
basis for the name _Atalapha_. Thereupon _Lasiurus_ was again used in
the belief that it was the earliest available name for the bats
concerned. But in 1909 (p. 90) Miller showed that the name _Lasiurus_
was preoccupied by _Nycteris_ Borkhausen, 1797 (p. 66). From 1909 until
1914 in conformance with the Law of Priority _Nycteris_ was used for
the red bat and the hoary bat.

At this point it is desirable to digress and indicate why and how the
Law of Priority came into being. In the 19th century different
technical names were used for the same kind of animal depending on the
opinions of individual authors. For example, one author used name A
because it was most descriptive of the morphology of the animal,
another author used name B because it had been used more often than any
other, another author used name C because it was more euphonious, etc.
In order to achieve uniformity and stability a set of rules was drawn
up in 1901 at the International Zoological Congress in Berlin. Those
rules were based principally on the rule, or law, of priority. In
effect, the law stated that the technical name first given to a kind of
animal (with starting date as of January 1, 1758, _Systema Naturae_ of
Linnaeus) would be the correct and official name. After the mentioned
rules were adopted, some zoologists, mostly non-taxonomists, objected
to the rules and in response to these objections a compromise was
adopted in 1913 at the International Zoological Congress in Monaco and
the International Committee on Zoological Nomenclature was authorized
to set aside, at its discretion, the Law of Priority. In 1913 it was
thought by everyone that the names conserved (_nomina conservanda_) by
setting aside the rules would be few.

Returning now to the generic names applied to the bats concerned, it is
to be noted that from 1803 until 1909 _Nycteris_ had been used as the
generic name of an African bat on the erroneous assumption that the
name was first applied in a valid fashion to the African bat. With the
aim of conserving the name _Nycteris_ for the African bat, some
zoologists petitioned the International Committee on Zoological
Nomenclature to set aside the Law of Priority and petitioned also that
the name _Lasiurus_ be validated for use again as the generic name for
New World bats. This petition was granted in 1914 in the first lot of
names for which exception to the rules was made. As a result, since
1914 _Lasiurus_ has been used with increasing frequency, and _Nycteris_
with decreasing frequency, for New World bats.

The above explanation of the application of the generic names
_Nycteris_, _Atalapha_, and _Lasiurus_ is given for two reasons: First,
study of more abundant material than was available to Harrison Allen in
1894 when he raised _Dasypterus_ to generic rank reveals, as set forth
beyond, that the yellow bats are not generically different from the red
bats and hoary bat and so will bear the same generic name that is
applied to the red bat and hoary bat; second, a choice of generic names
has to be made. Actually, the International Commission on Zoological
Nomenclature since 1913 has voted to make many, instead of only a few,
exceptions to the rules. The number of names resulting from these
exceptions is becoming so large that some zoologists fear that the
chaotic condition of nomenclature in the previous century will return.
Those who hold such fears maintain that adherence to the rules of 1901,
or to the Law of Priority, or at least to some rules, clearly is
desirable. Certainly there is much logic in that view. According to the
rules, _Nycteris_ is the correct name of the bats concerned. According
to the Commission, it is well to use instead the name _Lasiurus_.
Perhaps the time has come to follow the rules and use _Nycteris_. But,
because of the possibility that the Commission will return to its
policy of 1913 and recommend only a few instead of many exceptions to
the rules, the generic name _Lasiurus_ is tentatively used in the
following accounts.


Genus Lasiurus Gray

Hairy-tailed Bats

    1797. _Nycteris_ B[orkhause]n, Der Zoologe (Compendiose Bibliothek
    gemeinnützigsten Kenntnisse für alle Stände, pt. 21), Heft 4-7, p.
    66. Type, _Vespertilio borealis_ Müller [= _Lasiurus borealis_].
    _Nycteris_ Borkhausen is a homonym of _Nycteris_ G. Cuvier and É.
    Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 1795, type _Vespertilio hispidus_ Schreber,
    1774 [= _Nycteris hispida_], from Senegal. Although _Nycteris_
    Cuvier and Geoffroy St.-Hilaire is a _nomen nudum_, Opinion 111 of
    the International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature establishes
    the name as available for a genus of Old World bats. On this basis,
    _Nycteris_ Borkhausen is not available for the New World genus.
    _Nycteris_ É. Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 1803, is a synonym of
    _Nycteris_ Cuvier and Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 1795, as given status
    by the Commission.

    1831. _Lasiurus_ Gray, Zool. Misc., No. 1, p. 38. Type,
    _Vespertilio borealis_ Müller.

    1871. _Atalapha_ Peters, Monatsber. K. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin,
    p. 907, and other authors [_nec Atalapha_ Rafinesque, 1814].

    _Type species._--_Vespertilio borealis_ Müller.

    _Diagnosis._--Interfemoral membrane large and most of its upper
    surface furred; mammae 4; third, fourth and fifth fingers
    progressively shortened; ear short and rounded; skull short and
    broad; nares and palatal emargination wide and shallow (width
    transversely exceeding length anteroposteriorly); sternum
    prominently keeled; i. 1/3, c. 1/1, p. 1/2 or 2/2, m. 3/3; when
    two upper premolars present, anterior one minute, peglike, and
    displaced lingually; M3 much reduced, area of its crown less than
    a third that of M1.

    Members of this genus are notable for having three and even four
    young (more than other bats). In North America at least _L.
    borealis_ and _L. cinereus_, are migratory.


Provisional Key to the Recent Species of _Lasiurus_

1.  Color reddish or grayish (not yellowish); normally two premolars on
each side of upper jaw.

    2.  Occurring on Antillean islands (color reddish).

        3.  Length of upper tooth-row less than 4.5 mm. (occurring on
        Hispaniola and Bahamas) _L. minor_.

        3'. Length of upper tooth-row more than 4.5 mm. (not occurring
        on Hispaniola and Bahamas).

            4.  Greatest length of skull less than 13.9 mm. (occurring
            on Cuba) _L. pfeifferi._

            4'. Greatest length of skull more than 13.9 mm. (occurring
            on Jamaica) _L. degelidus._

    2'. Occurring on mainland and coastal islands of North and South
    America; also on Galapagos and Hawaiian islands (color reddish or
    grayish).

        5.  Total length more than 120 mm.; color grayish _L.
        cinereus._

        5'. Total length less than 120 mm.; color reddish.

        6.  Upper parts brick red to rusty red, frequently washed with
        white; lacrimal ridge present.

            7.  Not occurring on Galapagos Islands _L. borealis._

            7'. Known only from Galapagos Islands (both ear of 7.6 mm.
            and thumb of 6.4 mm. allegedly shorter than in _L. borealis_
            of adjacent mainland; presence of lacrimal ridge not verified)
            _L. brachyotis._

        6'. Upper parts not brick red to rusty red; lacrimal ridge not
        developed.

            8.  Forearm more than 46.5 mm. (48 in only known specimen,
            a male); dorsum bright rufous (absence of lacrimal ridge
            not verified) _L. egregius._

            8'. Forearm less than 46.5 mm.; dorsum not bright rufous.

                9.  Upper parts mahogany brown washed with white;
                forearm less than 43 mm _L. seminolus._

                9'. Upper parts deep chestnut; forearm more than 43 mm.
                (44.8 in only known specimen, a female) _L. castaneus._

1'. Color yellowish; only one premolar on each side of upper jaw.

    10.  Total length more than 119 mm.; length of upper tooth-row 6.0
    mm. or more _L. intermedius._

    10'. Total length less than 119 mm.; length of upper tooth-row less
    than 6.0 mm _L. ega._


Lasiurus intermedius

Northern Yellow Bat

    _Diagnosis._--Upper parts yellowish-orange, or yellowish brown, or
    brownish-gray faintly washed with black to pale yellowish gray;
    size large (forearm, 45.2-62.8; condylocanine length, 16.9-21.5).

_Distribution and Geographic Variation_

_Lasiurus intermedius_ H. Allen, type from Matamoros, Tamaulipas, has
been reported from the Rio Grande Valley of Texas southward to Honduras
and in Cuba. _Lasiurus floridanus_ (Miller), type from Lake Kissimmee,
Florida, has been recorded from southeastern Texas, eastward along the
Gulf of Mexico to Florida, and thence northward along the Atlantic
Coast to extreme southeastern Virginia (see records of occurrence
beyond and Fig. 2). Specimens of _intermedius_ from the vicinity of the
type locality and from other localities in México differ from specimens
of _floridanus_ (from Florida and southern Georgia) as follows: Larger,
both externally (especially forearm) and cranially (see measurements);
teeth larger and heavier; skull heavier and having more prominent
sagittal and lambdoidal crests; braincase less rounded, more elongate;
auditory bullae relatively smaller; upper parts averaging brighter
(yellowish to yellowish-orange in general aspect, rather than
yellowish-brown to brownish-gray).

The differences mentioned above are of the magnitude of those that
ordinarily separate subspecies of a single species rather than two
species. Miller (1902:392-393), in the original description of
_floridanus_, noted that the differences between it and _intermedius_
were slight and remarked (p. 393): "Indeed, it is probable that it
intergrades with the Texas animal." Lowery (1936:17) also has suggested
that intergradation might occur between _intermedius_ and _floridanus_
"in southwestern Louisiana or eastern Texas"; later (1943:223-224) he
pointed out that specimens from Baton Rouge, Louisiana, averaged larger
in cranial dimensions than typical _floridanus_ and again mentioned
the possibility of intergradation between the two kinds. Sanborn
(1954:25-26) touched obliquely on the problem when he wrote: "In
Florida, _Dasypterus intermedius_ is referred to as a Florida yellow
bat (_Dasypterus floridanus_)." Handley (1960:478) wrote that certain
morphological similarities suggested "gene flow" between the two kinds.

Specimens examined from Louisiana resemble _floridanus_ from Georgia
and Florida to the eastward in external dimensions. Some of those
specimens resemble _floridanus_ in size of skull, but two skulls from
Louisiana are inseparable from those of topotypes of _intermedius_. The
upper parts of specimens from Louisiana are generally like those of
animals to the east but average somewhat paler (less brownish). The
specimens seen from Louisiana seem to be intergrades between
_intermedius_ and _floridanus_ but clearly are assignable to the
latter.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Condylocanine length plotted against length of
forearm for specimens of the species _Lasiurus intermedius_.]

The picture is less clear as regards bats from southeastern Texas (one
specimen each from Colorado and Travis counties, and four specimens
from Harris County). Five of the specimens have skulls (the Travis
County specimen is a skin only) and of these, four are clearly
assignable, on the basis of size and shape of the skull, to
_intermedius_. The fifth skull (specimen from Colorado County) is
intermediate in size between _floridanus_ and _intermedius_ and on
that basis alone could be assigned with equal propriety to either. All
these specimens from Texas more closely resemble _floridanus_ than
_intermedius_ in external size (forearms: 49.2, 49.6, 50.7, 49.9
(approximate), 49.6, 49.1). The pale yellowish-gray upper parts of the
four adults, seemingly resulting from a dilution of the brownish color
found in _floridanus_, differ from the color of typical specimens of
both _intermedius_ and _floridanus_, but the average is nearer that of
_floridanus_ than that of _intermedius_. Color of pre-adult pelage in
the one July-taken young of the year resembles the color of adults. An
August-taken young of the year is in process of acquiring the adult
pelage but the hairs have not reached their full growth; it is pale
yellowish but not so grayish as the other specimens. All characters
considered, the specimens from eastern Texas resemble _floridanus_
more than they do _intermedius_, and so are provisionally assigned to
_floridanus_ (as was done by Taylor and Davis, 1947:19; Eads, _et
al._, 1956:440; and, Davis, 1960:59). Additional material from
southeastern Texas is needed. It will be remembered that the type
locality of _intermedius_ is in the Rio Grande Valley; all specimens
seen, in the study here reported on, from the Texas side of the valley
are unquestionably referable to that subspecies.

Intergradation, then, occurs between _L. intermedius_ and _L.
floridanus_ in some degree in southern Louisiana and in more marked
degree in southeastern Texas. Specimens from the area of intergradation
vary more individually in many features than do specimens from other
areas. In general the intergrades tend to resemble _floridanus_ in
small size externally and _intermedius_ in large size of skull. The
specimens from southeastern Texas differ from typical specimens of both
subspecies in color, being pale yellowish-gray (instead of yellowish to
yellowish-orange as in _intermedius_ or yellowish brown to
brownish-gray as in _floridanus_), and this difference is shared to
some extent with animals from Louisiana, the latter being somewhat
intermediate between bats from Texas and those from Florida and
Georgia, although nearer those from Florida and Georgia.

An hypothesis to account for the variation noted is that in Wisconsin
Time, and perhaps in earlier Pleistocene times, this yellow bat was (as
it is now) a warmth-adapted animal as Blair (1959:461) would term it.
Some cool period forced the mainland populations of the two species
into two refugia--peninsular Florida and eastern México--and the
present area of intergradation is, therefore, of a secondary rather
than a primary type. Possibly also the relatively treeless area of part
of southern Texas has made for a sparse population there of _Lasiurus
intermedius_ and gene flow now may be, and long may have been, slight
between the eastern and southern segments of the species.

It could be contended that the peculiar coloration of specimens from
southeastern Texas, coupled with the tendency to have a large skull (as
has _intermedius_) and small external dimensions (as has _floridanus_),
justifies subspecific recognition for the animals that here are termed
intergrades. But, judging by the specimens now available, such
subspecific recognition would tend to obscure rather than clarify the
geographic variation noted.


_Life History_

Probably bats of the species _Lasiurus intermedius_ seek retreats
primarily in trees (see Moore, 1949_a_:59-60) but Baker and Dickerman
(1956:443) reported "approximately 45 yellow bats" concealed on July
22, 1955, "among dried corn stalks hanging from the sides of a large
open tobacco shed" in the state of Veracruz. Young are born in late
spring, three being the only number known except that Davis (1960:59)
was told that in the vicinity of Mission, Texas, two was the usual
number "born in May and June." Sherman (1945:194) reported a female
with young (number not given) taken on June 7, 1918, at Seven Oaks,
Florida, and another with three young taken on June 20, 1941, at Ocala,
Florida. Lowery (1936:17) recorded a female, having three young,
obtained on June 17, 1932, at Baton Rouge, Louisiana. A specimen taken
on May 19, 1940, at Baton Rouge contained three embryos. Baker and
Dickerman (_loc. cit._) reported four adult females from Veracruz as
lactating on July 22, 1955, but they were accompanied by flying young
of the year and probably were near the end of the lactation period.
Among specimens examined, juveniles are available by date as follows: 5
mi. N Baton Rouge, Louisiana (June 26, 1953); Palm Beach, Florida (July
6, 1950); and Izamal, Yucatán ("taken with mother" on July 28, 1910).
Breeding probably takes place in autumn and winter; Sherman (_op.
cit._:196) reported males from Florida as sexually "mature" from the
beginning of September to mid-February. Late winter segregation of
sexes has been reported.


_Subspecies_

In the following accounts, localities of occurrence in each state are
listed from north to south; if two lie in the same latitude, the
westernmost is listed first. Localities that are italicized are not
shown on the distribution map (Fig. 2), either because undue crowding
of symbols would result or, in several cases, because we could not
precisely place the localities. Length of forearm is the average of
both forearms in individuals in which both forearms could be measured.


Lasiurus intermedius intermedius (H. Allen)

    1862. _Lasiurus intermedius_ H. Allen, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
    Philadelphia, 14:246, "April" (between May 27 and August 1), type
    from Matamoros, Tamaulipas.

    _Geographic distribution._--Southern México (Yucatán, Chiapas and
    Oaxaca), northward along Gulf Coast to Rio Grande Valley of
    southern Texas (see Fig. 2).

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium (see measurements); sagittal crest
    present (height above braincase averaging 0.4 mm. in 12 from
    Brownsville, Texas); interorbital region relatively broad; M3
    relatively broad (see comparisons in account of the Cuban
    subspecies beyond); mesostyle of M1 and M2 and 2nd commissure and
    cingulum of M3 large; pelage yellowish to yellowish-orange.

    _Comparisons._--See p. 79 and under accounts of _Lasiurus
    intermedius floridanus_ and the Cuban subspecies.

    _External measurements._--Three adult males from the Sierra de
    Tamaulipas in Tamaulipas: Total length, 146, 136, 142; length of
    tail-vertebrae, 69, 67, 70; length of hind foot, 11, 11, 11; length
    of ear from notch, 17, 16, 17; length of forearm (dry), 53.2, 51.8,
    51.9. Corresponding measurements for two adult females from 1 mi.
    SW Catemaco, Veracruz: 149, 155; 64, 69; 11, 12; 17, 17; 51.8,
    55.2. Weight in grams of the Tamaulipan specimens, respectively:
    24, 21, 24. For cranial measurements see Table 1.

    _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 45, as follows:
    TEXAS: 5-5/8 mi. N Mission, 2 (Texas A & M); _Santa Ana National
    Wildlife Refuge_, 1 (USNM); Brownsville, 13 (4 AMNH; 1 Texas A & M;
    8 USNM). TAMAULIPAS: _Matamoros_, 2 (USNM); Sierra de Tamaulipas,
    1200 ft., 10 mi. W, 2 mi. S Piedra, 1 (KU); _Sierra de Tamaulipas,
    1400 ft, 16 mi. W, 3 mi. S Piedra_, 2 (KU). VERACRUZ: 16 mi. SW
    Catemaco, 15 (KU). OAXACA: Oaxaca, 1 (British Mus.). CHIAPAS: San
    Bartolomé, 1 (USNM). YUCATAN: Tekom, 1 (Chicago Mus.); Izamal, 5
    (USNM). HONDURAS: Río Yeguare, between Tegucigalpa and Danli, 1
    (MCZ).

    Additional records: TEXAS: _Padre Island_ (Miller, 1897:118);
    _Cameron County_ (_ibid._). OAXACA: Tehuantepec (Handley,
    1960:478). YUCATAN: _Yaxcach_ (not found, Gaumer, 1917:274).


Lasiurus intermedius floridanus (Miller)

    1902. _Dasypterus floridanus_ Miller, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
    Philadelphia, 54:392, September 12, type from Lake Kissimmee,
    Oceola Co., Florida.

    _Geographic distribution._--Extreme southeastern Virginia, south
    along Atlantic Coast to and including peninsular Florida (except
    possibly extreme southern tip), thence westward to southern
    Louisiana and the southern part of eastern Texas (see Fig. 2).

    _Diagnosis._--Size small (see measurements); sagittal crest present
    but low; interorbital region relatively broad; teeth essentially as
    in _L. i. intermedius_ except averaging smaller; pelage
    yellowish-brown to grayish-brown. For comparison with the Cuban
    subspecies, see account of that subspecies.

    _Comparisons._--From _Lasiurus intermedius intermedius_, _L. i.
    floridanus_ differs as follows: averaging smaller (see
    measurements), especially in forearm and skull; teeth smaller;
    skull having less prominent sagittal and lambdoidal crests;
    braincase more nearly round; tympanic shields over petrosals
    approximately same size and therefore relatively larger; pelage of
    upper parts duller, yellowish-brown to brownish-gray instead of
    yellowish to yellowish-orange.

    _External measurements._--Average (and extremes) of 14
    February-taken males from along the Aucilla River, Jefferson Co.,
    Florida: Total length, 126.8 (121-131.5); length of tail-vertebrae,
    54.2 (51-60); length of hind foot, 9.8 (8-11); length of ear from
    notch (13 specimens), 16.3 (15-17); forearm (dry, 13 specimens),
    48.1 (46.7-50.0). Corresponding measurements of the holotype, an
    adult female (after Miller, 1902:392): 129, 52, 9, 17, 49. Average
    (and extremes) weight in grams of the series of males: 17.7
    (15.5-19.5). For cranial measurements see Table 1.

    _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 65, as follows:
    TEXAS: Austin, 1 (Texas U.); _4 mi. N Huffman_, 1 (Texas A & M);
    Houston, 3 (1 KU; 2 MVZ); Eagle Lake, 1 (Texas A & M). LOUISIANA: 5
    mi. N Baton Rouge, 1 (LSU); _1 mi. W LSU Campus, Baton Rouge_, 1
    (LSU); _Baton Rouge_, 7 (1 AMNH; 5 LSU; 1 USNM); _1/2 mi. E Baton
    Rouge_, 1 (LSU); North Island, Grand Lake, 1 (LSU); Lafayette, 2
    (USNM); Houma, 2 (USNM). GEORGIA: Beachton, 11 (6 Chicago Mus.; 5
    USNM). FLORIDA: _2 mi. S Tallahassee_, 1 (AMNH); 5 mi. W
    Jacksonville, 1 (AMNH); Aucilla River, 15 mi. S Waukenna, 7 (Univ.
    Fla.); _Aucilla River, at U.S. Hgy. 98_, 8 (Univ. Fla.); _W of
    Gainesville_, 1 (Univ. Fla.); Gainesville, 3 (2 Univ. Fla.; 1 Univ.
    Mich.); _near Gainesville_, 1 (Univ. Fla.); _Alachua County_, 1
    (Univ. Mich.); 2 mi. SW Deland, 2 (Univ. Fla.); head of
    Chassahowitzka River, 1 (USNM); Lakeland, 2 (Univ. Fla.); Seven
    Oaks [near present town of Safety Harbor], 2 (1 AMNH; 1 USNM); Lake
    Kissimmee, 1 (USNM); Palm Beach, 1 (Univ. Fla.); _Mullet Lake_ (not
    found), 1 (USNM).

    Additional records: VIRGINIA: Willoughby Beach (Rageot, 1955:456).
    SOUTH CAROLINA: 5 mi. NW Charleston (Coleman, 1940:90). LOUISIANA:
    New Orleans (Lowery, 1943:223). MISSISSIPPI: Hancock County
    (Hamilton, 1943:107). Georgia: W edge Camilla (Constantine,
    1958:65). FLORIDA (Sherman, 1945:195, unless otherwise noted): _St.
    Marys River_ [near Boulogue]; _vicinity Palm Valley_ (Ivey,
    1959:506); _6 mi. N Lake Geneva_ (Sherman, 1937:108); Old Town;
    Welaka (Moore, 1949a:59); Bunnell; Ocala; _Davenport_;
    _Hillsborough River State Park_; 1 mi. NE Punta Gorda (Frye,
    1948:182); Miami (Moore, 1949_b_:50).


Lasiurus intermedius insularis, new subspecies

    _Holotype._--Adult female, preserved in alcohol but having skull
    removed, formerly in the Poey Museum, University of Havana, now No.
    81666, Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas, from
    Cienfuegos, Las Villas Province, Cuba; obtained on January 23,
    1948, by D. Gonzáles Muñoz.

    _Geographic distribution._--Known only from the island of Cuba (see
    Fig. 2).

    _Diagnosis._--Large throughout (see measurements); sagittal crest
    enormously developed, especially posteriorly (height above
    braincase averaging 1.7 mm. in 4 specimens); interorbital region
    narrow; M3 narrow; mesostyle of M1 and M2 and 2nd commissure and
    cingulum of M3 small; pelage yellowish to reddish-brown.

    _Comparisons._--From _Lasiurus intermedius intermedius_ of the
    adjacent mainland of México, _L. i. insularis_ differs as follows:
    Larger, both externally and cranially; sagittal crest relatively
    higher, especially posteriorly; interorbital region relatively
    narrower; palate longer posterior to tooth-rows; teeth distinctly
    larger throughout except M3, which is relatively (frequently
    actually) narrower, averaging 66.1 (62.5-71.0) per cent width of M2
    in _insularis_ rather than 74.1 (66.6-79.3) per cent in 10
    _intermedius_ from Brownsville, Texas; mesostyle of M1 and M2
    relatively smaller as are second commissure and cingulum of M3;
    coloration of No. 254714 USNM resembling that of _L. i.
    intermedius_, but coloration of three specimens, preserved in
    alcohol, averaging somewhat darker (more reddish-brown) than in
    _intermedius_.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Geographic distribution of the three
subspecies of _Lasiurus intermedius_.

    1. _L. i. floridanus_
    2. _L. i. intermedius_
    3. _L. i. insularis_

Black dots represent localities of capture of specimens examined.
Hollow circles represent localities of capture of other specimens
recorded in the literature but not examined by us (Hall and Jones).]

    From _Lasiurus intermedius floridanus_ of the adjacent Floridan
    mainland, _L. i. insularis_ differs in many of the same ways that
    it differs from _L. i. intermedius_, except that the differences
    are even more trenchant because _floridanus_ is smaller than
    _intermedius_. Indeed, the difference in size between _floridanus_
    and _insularis_ is approximately the same as between _Lasiurus
    borealis_ and _Lasiurus cinereus_.

    _Measurements._--External measurements (all taken from specimens
    preserved in alcohol) of the holotype, followed by those of two
    other females, one from Laguna La Deseada, San Cristóbal, Pinar del
    Río Province, and the other from Bayate, Guantánamo, Oriente
    Province, are, respectively: Total length, 164, 161, 150; length of
    tail-vertebrae, 68, 76, 77; length of hind foot, 12, 12, 13; length
    of ear from notch, 20, 17, 19; length of forearm, 61.2, 62.6, 61.8.
    The length of forearm of a study skin from San Germán (that
    otherwise lacks external measurements) having wings spread is
    approximately 55.4. For cranial measurements see Table 1.

_Remarks._--Four of the five specimens on which the name _L. i.
insularis_ is based differ to such a degree from mainland populations
of the species _L. intermedius_ that specific rather than subspecific
recognition for the Cuban bat might seem warranted. It is because of
the fifth specimen (USNM 254714) that we accord subspecific rank to
_insularis_. It is smaller than the other Cuban specimens and except
for longer condylocanine length, longer mandibular tooth-rows, narrower
interorbital region, and heavier dentition is indistinguishable in
measurements from the largest specimens of _L. i. intermedius_ from the
mainland. In addition, it appears not to have the enormously developed
sagittal crest of the other specimens of _insularis_ although
posteriorly the dorsal part of the skull (where the crest is most
prominent) is missing. USNM 254714 agrees with the other Cuban
specimens in having the mesostyle of M1 and M2 somewhat reduced and in
having a small M3 on which the cingulum and second commissure are
poorly developed, and this specimen is regarded as representative of
the lower size limits of the Cuban population.

The skull from San Bias was found in an owl pellet (see de Beaufort,
1934:316).

    _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 5, all from Cuba, as
    follows: Pinar del Río Prov.: Laguna La Deseada, San Cristóbal, 1
    (Poey Museum). Las Villas Prov.: Cienfuegos, 1 (KU, the holotype).
    Camaguey Prov.: San Bias, 1 (Amsterdam Zoological Museum). Oriente
    Prov.: San Germán, 1 (USNM); Bayate, Guantánamo, 1 (Ramsdem Museum,
    Univ. Oriente).


TABLE 1.--CRANIAL MEASUREMENTS (IN MILLIMETERS) OF THREE SUBSPECIES
OF LASIURUS INTERMEDIUS

Table Legend:

Col. A: Catalogue number or number of specimens averaged
Col. B: Museum
Col. C: Sex
Col. D: Locality
Col. E: Condylocanine length
Col. F: Zygomatic breadth
Col. G: Interorbital breadth
Col. H: Alveolar length C-M3
Col. I: Breadth of rostrum (between anterior openings of intraorbital canals)
Col. J: Mastoid breadth
Col. K: Length of mandibular tooth-row (i-m3)

============================================================================
   A   |   B   | C |        D            | E  | F  | G  | H  | I  | J  | K  |
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
                     _Lasiurus intermedius floridanus_
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
Ave. 10|  UF   |[M]|[1]Aucilla River,    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |[M]|     Florida         |17.6|12.8| 5.0| 6.2| 7.2|10.0| 8.0|
               |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    | [2]|    |
 Min.  |  --   |-- |        --           |17.0|12.6| 4.7| 6.0| 6.9| 9.6| 7.8|
 Max.  |  --   |-- |        --           |18.2|13.0| 5.3| 6.4| 7.5|10.2| 8.2|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  1788 |  LSU  |[F]|Baton Rouge, La.     |18.7| -- | 5.1| 6.7| 7.7| -- | 8.8|
  1820 |  LSU  |[F]|Baton Rouge, La.     |18.5| -- | -- | 6.7| 7.2|10.1| 8.7|
  1840 |  LSU  |[M]|Baton Rouge, La.     |18.0|12.7| 5.0| 6.4| 7.1| 9.9| 8.0|
  6790 |  LSU  |[M]|Baton Rouge, La.     |18.0|12.8| 4.9| 6.5| 7.2| 9.9| 8.2|
  3681 |  LSU  |[M]|7 mi. SE Baton       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |  Rouge, La.         |17.7|12.6| 5.0| 6.4| 7.0| 9.8| 8.2|
  6791 |  LSU  |[F]|Grand Lake, La.[3]   |17.9|12.6| 4.9| 6.3| 7.2| 9.9| 8.3|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
 84218 |  MVZ  |[F]|Houston, Texas.      |19.1|13.8| 5.1| 6.6| 7.5|10.3| 8.7|
   769 | TAMC  |[F]|4 mi. N Huffman,     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |  Texas              |18.8|13.4| 5.0| 6.7| 7.7| -- | 8.7|
  3805 | TAMC  |[M]|Eagle Lake, Texas.   |18.1|12.9| 4.8| 6.6| 7.2| 9.8| 8.5|
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

                    _Lasiurus intermedius intermedius_
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  1437 | USNM  | ? |Matamoros, Tamaulipas|18.9|13.6| 5.1| 6.6| 7.5|10.7| 8.9|
  1439 | USNM  | ? |Matamoros, Tamaulipas|19.0|14.0| 5.3| 6.6| 7.8|10.7| 8.8|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
Ave. 12|USNM   | ? ||Brownsville, Texas  |18.7|13.8| 5.2| 6.6| 7.7|10.4| 8.7|
       |   [4] |[5]|                     | [6]| [6]|    |    |    | [6]|    |
Min.   |  --   | --|         --          |18.1|13.0| 4.9| 6.4| 7.4|10.0| 8.4|
Max.   |  --   | --|         --          |19.2|14.7| 5.5| 7.0| 8.2|11.1| 9.0|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
 55317 |  KU   |[M]|Sierra de Tamaulipas |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |                 [7] |18.2|13.2| 5.5| 6.2| 7.6|10.3| 8.0|
 55322 |  KU   |[M]|Sierra de Tamaulipas |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |                 [8] |18.4|13.7| 5.2| 6.5| 7.4|10.6| 8.4|
 55324 |  KU   |[M]|Sierra de Tamaulipas |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |                 [8] |18.3|13.2| 5.1| 6.5| 7.6|10.3| 8.1|
 67549 |  KU   |[F]|Catemaco, Veracruz   |19.0|13.5| 5.0| 6.5| 7.5|10.2| 8.8|
 67550 |  KU   |[F]|Catemaco, Veracruz   |19.0|13.5| 4.7| 6.4| 7.6|10.3| 8.7|
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

                _Lasiurus intermedius insularis_ (all from Cuba)
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  2395 | AZM   | ? |Cave near San Bias   |21.4|15.1| 4.8| 7.3| 8.4|11.9|9.5+|
254714 | USNM  |[M]|San Germán, Oriente  |19.5|14.1| 4.8| 6.9| 7.8|11.0| 9.3|
 81666 | KU    |[F]|Cienfuegos,          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |  Las Villas         |20.5|15.2| 4.6| 7.2| 8.2|11.9| 9.6|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |Poey   |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       | Mus.  |[F]|San Cristóbal,       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |       |   |  Pinar del Río      |21.5|15.6| 4.7| 7.5| 8.9| 1.8| 9.7|
       |       |   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |Ramsdem|   |                     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |Oriente|   |Bayate, Guantánamo,  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |  Univ.|[F]|  Oriente            |20.9|14.8| 4.6| 7.3| 8.4|11.2| 9.7|
-------+-------+---+---------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

      [1] "Rt. 98" and "15 mi. S Waukenna" both in Jefferson Co.

      [2] Only nine specimens.

      [3] "N Island, Grand Lake, Iberville Parish."

      [4] Some in Amer. Mus. Nat. History.

      [5] Females, 8; males, 3; unsexed, 1.

      [6] Only 11 specimens.

      [7] 10 mi. W, 2 mi. S Piedra, Tamaulipas.

      [8] 16 mi. W, 3 mi. S Piedra, Tamaulipas.


Lasiurus ega

Southern Yellow Bat

    _Diagnosis._--Upper parts yellowish-brown (much as in _Lasiurus
    intermedius floridanus_ from Louisiana) having overlay of grayish
    or blackish anterior to shoulders; hair on basal half of
    interfemoral membrane more yellowish than elsewhere; size medium
    (forearm 42.7-52.2; condylocanine length 14.6-16.3).

This species occurs from the southwestern United States (Palm Springs,
California, and Tucson, Arizona) southward into Uruguay and
northeastern Argentina. Of the six currently (see Handley, 1960)
recognized subspecies of _L. ega_, four occur only in South America,
and two occur only in North America.

Cabrera (1958:115) regarded _Dasypterus ega fuscatus_ Thomas
(1901:246), based on three specimens from Río Cauquete, Río Cauca,
Colombia, as a synonym of _Dasypterus ega panamensis_ Thomas (_loc.
cit._) that was based on a specimen from Bogava, 250 meters elevation,
Chiriquí, Panamá. The latter name has line priority over _fuscatus_.
Cabrera (1958:116) remarked that: "Las diferencias que Thomas señaló
entre el _Dasypterus_ de Panamá y el de Colombia (_fuscatus_) nos
parecen estar dentro de los límites de la variación individual, siendo
además muy raro que una especie de quiróptero este representada en
Colombia y en Panamá por razas diferentes."

On July 16, 1958, at the British Museum of Natural History, one of us
(Hall) examined the holotypes of _panamensis_ and _fuscatus_, as well
as other materials used by Thomas, and readily perceived the
differences that he pointed out. Thomas' description, although terse,
is accurate. _L. e. fuscatus_ is much more blackish than _panamensis_.
We are inclined to retain the two names as applicable to two
subspecies. Whether or not _fuscatus_ is synonymized under
_panamensis_, the holotype of _panamensis_ is an intergrade between the
almost black Colombian animal (_fuscatus_) and the paler individuals in
Central America and territory north thereof. Even so, the holotype of
_panamensis_ more closely resembles the blackish Colombian population
than the paler populations to the north and the name _panamensis_,
therefore, is correctly applicable to the bat from Panamá, but not to
bats of the species _Lasiurus ega_ from farther north as most authors
(see, for example, Hall and Kelson, 1959:194, map 143; and Handley,
1960:474) suggested was the case. For the populations north of Panamá
the name _Lasiurus ega xanthinus_ (Thomas) (1897:544) needs to be used.


Lasiurus ega xanthinus (Thomas)

    1897. _Dasypterus ega xanthinus_ Thomas, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,
    ser. 6, 20:544, December, type from Sierra Laguna, Baja California.

    1953. _Lasiurus ega xanthinus_, Dalquest, Louisiana State
    Univ. Studies, Biol. Ser., 1:61, December 28.

    _Geographic distribution._--Southern California, southern
    Arizona, and northern Coahuila southward through México to southern
    Costa Rica.

    _Diagnosis._--Yellowish-brown with an overlay of grayish
    anterior to the shoulders; forearm, 42.7-47.2.

    _Remarks._--Specimens from Baja California and the adjacent
    western part of the mainland of México average paler than specimens
    from Veracruz and some places in Central America but the
    differences are slight.

    _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 21, as follows:
    BAJA CALIFORNIA.--Comondú, 1 (USNM); Sierra Laguna, 4 (1
    USNM, 3 British Mus.). COAHUILA.--4 mi. W Hacienda La
    Mariposa, 2300 ft., 2 (KU). ZACATECAS.--Concepción del
    Oro, 7680 ft., 4 (KU). TAMAULIPAS.--Sierra de Tamaulipas,
    1200 ft., 10 mi. W, 2 mi. S Piedra, 5 (KU); 16 mi. W, 3 mi. S
    Piedra, 1 (KU). SINALOA.--1 mi. S Pericos, 1 (KU).
    VERACRUZ.--Achotal, 1 (Chicago Mus.).
    YUCATAN.--Yaxcach, 1 (USNM). COSTA RICA.--Lajas,
    Villa Quesada, 1 (AMNH); San José, 1 (AMNH).

    _Additional records:_ CALIFORNIA: Palm Springs
    (Constantine, 1946:107). ARIZONA: Tucson (Cockrum,
    1961:97). BAJA CALIFORNIA (Handley, 1960:474): Santa Ana;
    Miraflores. SINALOA: Escuinapa (Handley, 1960:475).
    DURANGO: Aguajequiroz, 12 mi. SSW Mapimí, 5000 ft. (Greer,
    1960:511). SAN LUIS POTOSI (Dalquest, 1953:62): 1-1/2 mi.
    E Río Verde; 19 km. SW Ebano; 4 mi. SSW Ajinche. QUINTANA
    ROO: 7 mi. N, 37 mi. E Puerto de Morelos (Ingles, 1959:384).
    HONDURAS: Tegucigalpa (Handley, 1960:474).


Lasiurus ega panamensis (Thomas)

    1901. _Dasypterus ega panamensis_ Thomas, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,
    ser. 7, 8:246, September, type from Bogava [= Bugaba], Chiriquí,
    250 meters, Panamá.

    1960. _Lasiurus ega panamensis_, Handley, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus.,
    112:474, October 6.

    _Geographic distribution._--Panamá; also recorded by Handley
    (1960:474) from Venezuela.

    _Diagnosis._--"General colour dark brownish clay-color, something
    between Ridgway's 'raw-umber' and 'clay-color'. Fur black basally,
    then dull brownish buffy, the extreme tips black. Center of face
    similar to back, cheeks from eyes to lips contrasting black. Rump
    and hairy part of interfemoral verging toward brownish fulvous.
    Under surface similar to upper." (Thomas, 1901:246.) Forearm of
    holotype, 46.5.

    _Remarks._--Notes taken down by one of us (Hall) on July 16, 1958,
    at the British Museum, Natural History, contain the following:
    "Color accurately described by Thomas. The blackish stands out. The
    difference between the types of _D. e. panamensis_ and _D. e.
    xanthinus_ is tremendous."

    _Record of occurrence._--Specimen examined, one, the type (British
    Mus.).




RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SPECIES OF LASIURUS


As suggested by Dalquest in 1953 (p. 62) and by Handley in 1959 (p.
119) and 1960 (p. 473), the yellow bats, _Lasiurus ega_ (Gervais) and
_Lasiurus intermedius_ H. Allen, so closely resemble the hoary bat,
_Lasiurus cinereus_ (Palisot de Beauvois), and the red bats, _Lasiurus
borealis_ (Müller) and the seven related species listed below, that
all are properly included in a single genus. Many of the common
characteristics are enumerated above in the diagnosis of the genus
(see also Handley, 1960:473).

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Diagram of bones of right arm and third finger
(middle digit) including cartilage on distal end of terminal (3rd)
phalanx. Percentages are in terms of the over-all length of the arm and
third finger.]

A listing of the differences between the species is less impressive
than a listing of the resemblances. The yellow bats differ less from
the red bats than does the hoary bat, _L. cinereus_, which differs from
all of the others as follows: talonid on m3 larger; p4 single-rooted
instead of double-rooted; hypocone on M1 and M2 smaller; coronoid
process lower; ossified part of tympanic ring, which shields the
petrosal, larger; humerus relatively shorter; forearm relatively
longer; first phalanx of middle finger relatively shorter; presternum
including keel longer than wide instead of _vice versa_. The
differences in the sternum and proportions of the forelimb reflect the
more rapid flight of the hoary bat. The yellow bats differ from the red
bats and hoary bat in long rostrum, pronounced sagittal crest, high
coronoid process, absence of the first upper premolar, long first
phalanx of the third digit and short terminal (3rd) phalanx of the same
digit. Features in which the red bats are extreme in the genus are
short rostrum, short forearm, and relatively longer second phalanx of
the third finger. The red bats differ only slightly one from another.

Next to nothing is known of extinct Tertiary ancestors of species of
the genus _Lasiurus_. Also relatively little is known about _Lasiurus_
in the Pleistocene. Consequently, evolution of the living species has
to be inferred almost entirely from what is known about their
structure, habits, and geographic distribution. Figure 4 presents some
ideas concerning relationships.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Postulated relationships of species of the genus
_Lasiurus_.]




LIST OF NAMED KINDS OF THE GENUS LASIURUS


The words "type from" indicate that a specimen or specimens served as
basis for the name. The words "type locality" signify lack of knowledge
as to whether a specimen was preserved.


Red Bats

_Lasiurus borealis borealis_ (Müller), 1776, type from New York.

    [_Vespertilio_] _noveboracensis_ Erxleben, 1777, based, in part,
    on "Der Neujorker" of Müller (_ante_).

    _Vespertilio lasiurus_ Schreber, 1781, type locality, North
    America.

    _Vespertilio rubellus_ Palisot de Beauvois, 1796, type locality
    unknown.

    _Vespertilio rubra_ Ord, 1815, based on the red bat of Wilson,
    Amer. Ornith., 6:60.

    _Vespertilio tesselatus_ Rafinesque, 1818, type locality unknown.

    _Vespertilio monachus_ Rafinesque, 1818, type locality unknown.

    _Vespertilio rufus_ Warden, 1820, based on the red bat of Wilson,
    _ibid._

    _Lasiurus funebris_ Fitzinger, 1870, type locality, Tennessee.

    _Myotis quebecensis_ Yourans, 1930, type from Anse-à-Wolfe,
    Quebec.

_Lasiurus borealis frantzii_ (Peters), 1871, type from Costa Rica.

_Lasiurus borealis teliotis_ (H. Allen), 1891, type probably from
California.

    _Lasiurus borealis ornatus_ Hall, 1951, type from Penuela,
    Veracruz.

_Lasiurus borealis varius_ (Poeppig), 1835, type from Antuco,
Provincia de Bió-Bió, Chile.

    _Nycticeus poepingii_ Lesson, 1836, type from Chile.

    _Lasiurus borealis salinae_ Thomas, 1902, type from Cruz del Eje,
    Cordoba, Argentina.

_Lasiurus borealis blossevillii_ Lesson and Garnot, 1826, type from
Montevideo, Uruguay.

    _Vespertilio bonariensis_ Lesson, 1827, type from Buenos Aires,
    Argentina.

    _Lasiurus enslenii_ Lima, 1926, type from São Lourenço, Rio Grande
    do Sul, Brazil.

_Lasiurus pfeifferi_ (Gundlach), 1861, type from Cuba.

_Lasiurus degelidus_ Miller, 1931, type from Sutton's, District of
Vere, Jamaica.

_Lasiurus minor_ Miller, 1931, type from "Voute l'Eglise," 1350 ft., a
cave near the Jacmel road a few kilometers N Trouin, Haiti.

_Lasiurus seminolus_ (Rhoads), 1895, type from Tarpon Springs,
Pinellas Co., Florida.

_Lasiurus castaneus_ Handley, 1960, type from Tacarcuna Village, 3200
ft., Río Pucro, Darién, Panamá.

_Lasiurus egregius_ (Peters), 1871, type from Santa Catarina, Brazil.

_Lasiurus brachyotis_ (J. A. Allen), 1892, type from San Cristóbal
Island, Galapagos Islands.


Yellow Bats

_Lasiurus golliheri_ (Hibbard and Taylor), Contributions Mus. Paleo.,
Univ. Michigan, 16:162, fig. 10F, July 1, 1960 [an extinct species],
type from [a stratum of Late Pleistocene Age] "Below the caliche bed
in the Kingsdown formation; Cragin Quarry local fauna, locality 1
(Sangamon age); Big Springs Ranch, SW 1/4 sec. 17, T. 32 S., R. 28 W.
(Kansas University Locality 6), Meade County, Kansas."

_Lasiurus ega xanthinus_ (Thomas), 1897, type from Sierra Laguna, Baja
California.

_Lasiurus ega panamensis_ (Thomas), 1901, type from Bugaba, Chiriquí,
Panamá.

_Lasiurus ega fuscatus_ (Thomas), 1901, type from Río Cauquete,
Colombia.

_Dasypterus ega punensis_ J. A. Allen, 1914, type from Isla de Puná,
Ecuador.

_Lasiurus ega ega_ (Gervais), 1856, type from Ega, Estado de Amazonas,
Brazil.

    _Lasiurus caudatus_ Tomes, 1857, type from Pernambuco, Brazil.

_Lasiurus ega argentinus_ (Thomas), 1901, type from Goya, Province of
Corrientes, Argentina.

_Lasiurus intermedius intermedius_ H. Allen, 1862, type from
Matamoros, Tamaulipas, México.

_Lasiurus intermedius floridanus_ (Miller), 1902, type from Lake
Kissimmee, Osceola Co., Florida.

_Lasiurus intermedius insularis_ Hall and Jones, 1961, type from
Cienfuegos, Las Villas Province, Cuba.


Hoary Bats

_Lasiurus fossilis_ Hibbard, Contributions Mus. Paleo., Univ. Michigan,
8(No.6): 134, fig. 5, June 20, 1950 [an extinct species], type from [an
early Pleistocene or a late Pliocene deposit] "Rexroad formation,
Rexroad fauna. Locality UM-K1-47, Fox Canyon, XI Ranch, Meade County,
Kansas."

_Lasiurus cinereus cinereus_ (Palisot de Beauvois), 1796, type from
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Known from Late Pleistocene time as well as
from Recent time (see Hibbard and Taylor, Contributions Mus. Paleo.,
Univ. Michigan, 16:159, fig. 10A, July 1, 1960, for occurrence in
Cragin Quarry local fauna, Sangamon Age, Meade County, Kansas).

    _Vespertilio pruinosus_ Say, 1823, type from Engineer Cantonment,
    Washington Co., Nebraska.

    _A[talapha]. mexicana_ Saussure, 1861, type from an unknown
    locality, probably from Veracruz, Puebla, or Oaxaca.

_Lasiurus cinereus villosissimus_ É. Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 1806, type
locality, Asunción, Paraguay.

    _Lasiurus grayi_ Tomes, 1857, type from Chile.

    _Atalapha pallescens_ Peters, 1871, type from Paramo de la Culata,
    Andes de Mérida, Venezuela.

    _Atalapha cinerea brasiliensis_ Pira, 1905, type from Ignape, São
    Paulo, Brazil.

_Lasiurus cinereus semotus_ (H. Allen), 1890, type from Hawaii.




EXPLANATION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Hall and Jones are jointly responsible for the accounts of the two
species of yellow bats, but Hall alone assumes responsibility for the
other parts of the paper. Thanks are extended to the National Science
Foundation for financial support (Grant No. 56 G 103) of the study here
reported on. We are grateful also to the following persons for the loan
of specimens in their care: S. B. Benson, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
University of California (MVZ); W. F. Blair, Department of Zoology,
University of Texas (Univ. Texas); W. B. Davis, Dept. Wildlife
Management, Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas (TAMC or Texas
A & M); D. H. Johnson, C. O. Handley, Jr., and W. H. Setzer, U.S.
National Museum (USNM); Barbara Lawrence, Museum of Comparative Zoology
at Harvard College (MCZ); J. N. Layne, Department of Biology,
University of Florida (UF); G. H. Lowery, Jr., Museum of Natural
History, Louisiana State University (LSU); P. J. H. van Bree,
Department of Mammals, Zoölogisch Museum, Amsterdam (AZM); and R. G.
Van Gelder, American Museum of Natural History (AMNH). Thanks are
extended also to E. T. Hooper and W. H. Burt, Mus. Zoology, University
of Michigan (Univ. Mich.), to Philip Hershkovitz, Chicago Natural
History Museum (Chicago Mus.), and to Peter Crowcroft, British Museum,
Natural History, for permission to examine specimens there. Mr.
Gilberto Silva Taboada arranged the loan of specimens from the Poey
Museum, University of Havana and from the Ramsdem Museum, University of
Oriente, both in Cuba. Mr. Silva Taboada and Dr. Carlos G. Aguayo of
the Poey Museum graciously arranged an exchange of specimens whereby
the holotype of _L. i. insularis_ became the property of the Museum of
Natural History, University of Kansas. Specimens in the last mentioned
institution are identified with the symbol KU.




LITERATURE CITED


ALLEN, H.

1862. Descriptions of two new species of Vespertilionidae, and some
remarks on the genus Antrozous. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, pp.
246-248, "April" but between May 27 and August 1.

1894. A monograph of the bats of North America. Bull. U.S. Nat. Mus.,
43:i-ix + 1-198, pls. 1-38, March 14.

BAKER, R. H., and DICKERMAN, R. W.

1956. Daytime roost of the yellow bat in Veracruz. Jour. Mamm., 37:443,
September 11.

BLAIR, W. F.

1959. Distributional patterns of vertebrates in the southern United
States in relation to past and present environments. Pp. 443-468, _in_
Hubbs, C. L. (ed.), Zoogeography, Amer. Assoc. Adv. Sci. Publ. 51:x +
509, January 16.

BORKHAUSEN, M. B.

1797. Der Zoologe (Compendiose Bibliothek gemeinnützigsten Kenntnisse
für alle Stände, pt. xxi), Heft iv-vii [including page 66; original not
seen].

CABRERA, A.

1958. Catalogo de los mamíferos de America del Sur. Rev. Mus. Argentino
Cienc., Nat. Cienc., Zool., 4(1):l-307, March 27.

COCKRUM, E. L.

1960. Southern yellow bat from Arizona. Jour. Mamm., 42:97, February
20.

COLEMAN, R. H.

1940. Dasypterus floridanus in South Carolina. Jour. Mamm., 21:90,
February 15.

CONSTANTINE, D. G.

1946. A record of Dasypterus ega xanthinus from Palm Springs,
California. Bull. Southern California Acad. Sci., Los Angeles, 45:107,
September 20.

1958. Ecological observations on lasiurine bats in Georgia. Jour.
Mamm., 39:64-70, 1 fig., February 20.

DALQUEST, W. W.

1953. Mammals of the Mexican state of San Luis Potosí. Louisiana State
Univ. Studies, Biol. Ser., 1:1-229, 1 fig., December 28.

DAVIS, W. B.

1960. The mammals of Texas. Game and Fish Comm., Bull. 41:1-252, 73
figs., 64 maps.

DE BEAUFORT, L. F.

1934. Dasypterus intermedius H. Allen in Cuba. Jour. Mamm., 15:316,
November 15.

EADS, R. B., MENZIES, G. C., and WISEMAN, J. S.

1956. New locality records for Texas bats. Jour. Mamm., 37:440,
September 11.

FRYE, O. E., JR.

1948. Extension of range of two species of bats in Florida. Jour.
Mamm., 29:182, May 14.

GAUMER, G. F.

1917. Monografía de los mamíferos de Yucatán. Dept. Talleres Gráficos
Secretaría Fomento, México, xli + 331 pp., 57 pls., 2 photographs, 1
map.

GERVAIS, P.

1856. _In_ Castelnau, F. L. de Laporte. Expédition dans les parties
centrales de l'Amérique du Sud ... pendant ... 1843 a 1847..., vol. for
1855 [part], pp. 25-88, pls. 7-15.

GRAY, J. E.

1831. Descriptions of some new genera and species of bats. Zoological
Miscellany, No. 1, pp. 37-38.

GREER, J. K.

1960. Southern yellow bat from Durango, México. Jour. Mamm., 41:511,
November 11.

HALL, E. R., and KELSON, K. R.

1959. The mammals of North America. The Ronald Press Co., New York,
1280 pp., 1231 illustrations, March 31.

HAMILTON, W. J., JR.

1943. The mammals of eastern United States. Comstock Publ. Co., Ithaca,
New York, 432 pp., illustrated.

HANDLEY, C. O., JR.

1959. A revision of American bats of the genera Euderma and Plecotus.
Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 110:95-246, 27 figs., September 3.

1960. Descriptions of new bats from Panama. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus.,
112:459-479, October 6.

INGLES, L. G.

1959. Notas acerca de los mamíferos Mexicanos. An. Inst. Biol.,
29:379-408, March 31.

IVEY, R. D.

1959. The mammals of Palm Valley, Florida. Jour. Mamm., 40:585-591,
November 20.

LOWERY, G. H., JR.

1936. A preliminary report on the distribution of the mammals of
Louisiana. Proc. Louisiana Acad. Sci., 3:11-39, 2 text figs., 4 pls.,
March.

1943. Check-list of the mammals of Louisiana and adjacent waters.
Occas. Papers Mus. Zool., Louisiana State Univ., 13:213-257, 5 figs.,
November 22.

MILLER, G. S., JR.

1897. Revision of the North American bats of the family
Vespertilionidae. N. Amer. Fauna, 13:1-140, 3 pls., 40 figs., October
16.

1902. Twenty new American bats. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia,
54:389-412, September 12.

1909. The generic name _Nycteris_. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 22:90,
April 17.

MOORE, J. C.

1949_a_. Putnam County and other Florida mammal notes. Jour. Mamm.,
30:57-66, February 14.

1949_b_. Range extensions of two bats in Florida. Quart. Jour. Florida
Acad. Sci., 11:50, March 22.

PETERS, W.

1871. "22 December Gesammtsitzung der Akademie ... eine monographische
Übersicht der Chiropterengattungen _Nycteris_ und _Atalapha_."
Monatsberichte d. Konig. Preuss. Akad. d. Wiss. zu Berlin (for 1870),
pp. 900-914, 1 pl.

RAFINESQUE, C. S.

1814. Précis des decouvertes et travaux somiologiques. Palerme, pp.
1-55 + 3.

RAGEOT, R. H.

1955. A new northeasternmost record of the yellow bat, _Dasypterus
floridanus_. Jour. Mamm., 36:456, August 30.

SANBORN, C. C.

1954. Bats of the United States. Public Health Reports, 69(1):17-28,
illustrated, January.

SHERMAN, H. B.

1937. A list of the Recent land mammals of Florida. Proc. Florida Acad.
Sci. (for 1936), 1:102-128.

1945. The Florida yellow bat, _Dasypterus floridanus_. Proc. Florida
Acad. Sci. (for 1944), 7:193-197, January 20.

TAYLOR, W. P., and DAVIS, W. B.

1947. The mammals of Texas. Bull. Texas Game, Fish and Oyster Comm.,
27:1-79, illustrated, August.

THOMAS, O.

1897. _Descriptions of new bats and rodents from America._ Ann. Mag.
Nat. Hist., ser. 6, 20:544-553, December.

1901. _New Neotropical mammals, with a note on the species of_
Reithrodon. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, 8:246-254, September.


_Transmitted June 30, 1961._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of North American Yellow Bats,
'Dasypterus,' And a List of the Named Kinds Of the Genus Lasiurus Gray, by E. Raymond Hall and J. Knox Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN YELLOW BATS ***

***** This file should be named 31679-8.txt or 31679-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/7/31679/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
