The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Apologie for the Royal Party (1659); and
A Panegyric to Charles the Second (1661), by John Evelyn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: An Apologie for the Royal Party (1659); and A Panegyric to Charles the Second (1661)

Author: John Evelyn

Editor: Geoffrey Keynes

Release Date: February 23, 2006 [EBook #17833]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APOLOGIE, THE ROYAL PARTY (1659) ***




Produced by David Starner, Louise Pryor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





{Transcriber's notes:

All material added by the transcriber is surrounded by braces {}.

The original has many inconsistent spellings. A few corrections have
been made for obvious typographical errors; they have been noted
individually at the end of the text. Some words are unclear; they have
also been noted.

The caret character (^) indicates that the remainder of the word is
superscripted. The word Tyranny (Tyrannie, Tyrannies) is sometimes spelled
with only one 'n', the other being denoted by a diacritical mark. The
spelling has been regularised to 'nn'.

The original contains some handwritten corrections and additions (see the
Introduction for details). They are represented [HW: like this].

Sidenotes are represented [SN: like this]. }




The Augustan Reprint Society


John Evelyn
_An Apologie for the Royal Party_ (1659); and
_A Panegyric to Charles the Second_ (1661)


With an Introduction by
Geoffrey Keynes


Publication Number 28


Los Angeles
William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
University of California
1951




_GENERAL EDITORS_

H. RICHARD ARCHER, _Clark Memorial Library_
RICHARD C. BOYS, _University of Michigan_
EDWARD NILES HOOKER, _University of California, Los Angeles_
JOHN LOFTIS, _University of California, Los Angeles_


_ASSISTANT EDITOR_

W. EARL BRITTON, _University of Michigan_


_ADVISORY EDITORS_

EMMETT L. AVERY, _State College of Washington_
BENJAMIN BOYCE, _Duke University_
LOUIS I. BREDVOLD, _University of Michigan_
CLEANTH BROOKS, _Yale University_
JAMES L. CLIFFORD, _Columbia University_
ARTHUR FRIEDMAN, _University of Chicago_
LOUIS A. LANDA, _Princeton University_
SAMUEL H. MONK, _university Of Minnesota_
ERNEST MOSSNER, _University of Texas_
JAMES SUTHERLAND, _Queen Mary College, London_
H. T. SWEDENBERG, JR., _University of California, Los Angeles_




INTRODUCTION

On October 24, 1659, a quarto pamphlet was published in London with the
following title: "The Army's Plea for Their present Practice: tendered to
the consideration of all ingenuous and impartial men. Printed and
published by special command. London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to
the Army, dwelling in Aldersgate Street next door to the Peacock. 1659".
Three days afterwards, on October 27, John Evelyn had finished writing an
answer, which was published a week later, on November 4, under the title:
"An Apologie for the Royal Party ... With a Touch At the pretended Plea
for the Army. Anno Dom. MDCLIX". No author's name, printer or place was
given. Evelyn afterwards made the note in his Diary under the date
November 7, 1659, that is, three days after the actual publication: "Was
publish'd my bold Apologie for the King in His time of danger, when it was
capital to speak or write in favour of him. It was twice printed, so
universaly it took."[1] Evelyn was by conviction an ardent royalist, but
by temperament he was peaceable, and the publication of this pamphlet was
a courageous act on his part, involving considerable risks.

The _Apologie for the Royal Party_ contains an eloquent and outspoken
attack upon the parliamentary party, the depth of the author's feelings
making his style of writing more effective than it usually was.

Events were at this date nearing their climax, and Evelyn, soon after the
publication of his pamphlet, made persistent attempts to induce Colonel
Henry Morley, then Lieutenant of the Tower of London, to declare for the
King. In the edition of Baker's _Chronicle of the Kings of England_,
edited by Edward Phillips, 1665, is given the following account of the
negotiations (p. 736): "Mr. Evelyn gave him [Col. Morley] some visits to
attemper his affection by degrees to a confidence in him, & then by
consequence to ingage him in his designes; and to induce him the more
powerfully thereunto, he put into his hands an excellent and unanswerable
hardy treatise by him written and severall times reprinted, intituled _An
Apology for the Royall Party_, which he backed with so good Argument and
dextrous Addresses in the prosecution of them, that, after some private
discourse, the Colonel was so well inclin'd, as to recommend to him the
procurement of his Majestie's Grace for him, his Brother-in-law Mr. Fagg,
and one or two more of his Relations". Phillips added an account of a
letter written by Evelyn to Colonel Morley, and gave him great credit for
the influence which he exerted, though Evelyn endorsed a draft of the
narrative with a statement saying there "was too much said concerning me".
Nevertheless part of the narrative was confirmed by Evelyn when he wrote
on the title-page of the copy of the pamphlet here reproduced: "Delivered
to Coll. Morley a few daies after his contest w^th Lambert in the palace
yard by J. Evelyn". The "contest" with General Lambert took place on
October 12 or 13 when Morley, pistol in hand, refused to allow him at the
head of his troops to pass through the Palace Yard.

Evelyn also wrote on the title-page of this copy of his pamphlet "three
tymes printed". In fact there were four printings, all described in the
writer's _John Evelyn, a Study in Bibliophily & a Bibliography of his
Writings_, New York, The Grolier Club, 1937, the one here reproduced being
the fourth and final form. Nevertheless all four issues are now extremely
scarce, the first printing being known in three copies (one in the United
States), the second in seven (two in the United States), the third in one,
and the fourth in one. This apparently unique relic of Evelyn's bold
gesture on behalf of his King is in the writer's possession and is still
as issued, edges untrimmed and with its eight leaves stitched in a
contemporary paper wrapper. It has been reprinted only in Evelyn's
_Miscellaneous Writings_, 1825, pp. 169-192.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Charles II actually returned to England in 1660 Evelyn's feelings
were deeply stirred. He had played some part in the restoration of the
monarchy, and, with his literary instinct, naturally felt impelled to be
among those who wished to present the King with an address on the day of
his Coronation. This took place on April 23, 1661, and on the following
day Evelyn recorded in his Diary: "I presented his Ma^tie with his
Panegyric in the Private Chamber, which he was pleas'd to accept most
graciously: I gave copies to the Lord Chancellor and most of the noblemen
who came to me for it."[2] Evelyn's _Panegyric_ was thus distributed
privately and no doubt in small number, so that it is today extremely
uncommon, being known only in five copies, not more than one of which is
in the United States of America. Evelyn possessed a copy in 1687 according
to his library catalogue compiled in that year, and a copy (not
necessarily the same one) is now among his books in the library of Christ
Church, Oxford, but it seems to have been unknown in 1825 and was not
included in the _Miscellaneous Writings_. William Upcott, the editor, in
fact erroneously identified the _Panegyric_ with the anonymous piece in
folio: "A Poem upon his Majesties Coronation ... Being S^t Georges day ...
London, Printed for Gabriel Bedel and Thomas Collins ... 1661". This
mistake was not put right until a copy of the true _Panegyric_ with
Evelyn's name on the title-page was acquired for the British Museum in
1927 from the Britwell Court Library. The copy here reproduced is in the
writer's collection, and has a few corrections in Evelyn's hand: (a)
_XXXIII. of April_, on title-page corrected to _XXIII_; (b) p.6. l.18
_Family_ altered to _Firmament_; (c) p.8. l.16 from bottom _suffer_
altered to _surfeit_.

When the _Panegyric_ was identified it was realised that it was not a
poem, but an eloquent and extravagant composition in prose, in which
Evelyn invested Charles II with every conceivable virtue and all wisdom.
This was no doubt written with sincere enthusiasm, though Evelyn suffered
a profound disillusionment in later years; and if he ever read his
effusion again it must have caused him some distress. The _Panegyric_ is
now reprinted for the first time.

Geoffrey Keynes


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Evelyn's _Diary_, ed. Wheatley, vol. II, p. 108.

[2] Evelyn's _Diary_, ed. Wheatley, vol. II, p. 130.




AN
A P O L O G Y
FOR THE
ROYAL PARTY:
Written in a
L E T T E R
To a Person of the Late
COUNCEL of STATE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_By a Lover of Peace and of his Country._

       *       *       *       *       *

WITH
A  T O U C H
At the Pretended
PLEA FOR THE ARMY.

[HW: three tymes printed.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[HW: Delivered to Coll: Morley, a few daies
after his contest w^th Lambert in the
Palace Yard: by J. Evelyn:]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Anno Dom. MDCLIX._




AN
A P O L O G I E
FOR THE
R O Y A L   P A R T Y:
Written in a LETTER to a Person of the late
_COUNCEL_ of _STATE_,
By a Lover of Peace and of his Countrey:
With a Touch at the _pretended Plea_ for the Army.

_SIR_,

The many Civilities which you are still pleased to continue to me, and my
very great desire to answer them in the worthiest testimonies of my zeal
for your service, must make my best Apology for this manner of Addresse;
if out of an extream affection for your noblest Interest, I seem
transported a little upon your first reflections, and am made to despise
the consequence of entertaining you with such Truths, as are of the
greatest danger to my self; but of no less import to your happiness, and,
which carry with them the most indelible Characters of my Friendship. For
if as the Apostle affirms, _For a good man, some would even dare to dy_,
why should my Charity be prejudged, if hoping to convert you from the
errour of your way, I despair not of rendring you the Person for whose
preservation there will be nothing too dear for me to expose?

I might with reason beleeve that the first election of the Party wherein
you stood engaged, proceeded from inexperience and the mistake of your
zeal; not to say from your compliance to the passions of others; because I
both knew your education, and how obsequious you have alwayes shewed your
self to those who had then the direction of you: But, when after the
example of their conversion, upon discovery of the Impostures which
perverted them; and the signal indignation of God, upon the several
periods which your eyes have lately beheld, of the bloudiest Tyrannies,
and most prodigious oppressors that ever any age of the world produc'd, I
see you still persist in your course, and that you have turn'd about with
every revolution which has hapned: when I consider, what contradictions
you have swallowed, how deeply you have ingaged, how servilely you have
flatter'd, and the base and mean submissions by which you have
dishonour'd your self, and stained your noble Family; not to mention the
least refinement of your religion or morality (besides that you have still
preserved a civility for me, who am ready to acknowledge it, and never
merited other from you) I say, when I seriously reflect upon all this; I
cannot but suspect the integrity of your procedure, deplore the sadness of
your condition, and resolve to attempt the discovery of it to you; by all
the instances, which an affection perfectly touch't with a zeal for your
eternall interest can produce. And who can tell, but it may please
Almighty God, to affect _you_ yet by a weak instrument, who have resisted
so many powerfull indications of his displeasure at your proceedings, by
the event of things?

For, since you are apt to recriminate, and after you have boasted of the
prosperity or your cause, and the thriving of your Wickedness (an Argument
farr better becoming a _Mahumetan_ then a _Christian_) let us state the
matter a little, and compare particulars together; let us go back to the
source, and search the very principles; and then see, if ever any cause
had like success indeed; and whether it be a just reproach to your
Enemies, that the judgments of God have begun with them, whilst you know
not yet, where they may determine.

First then, be pleased to look North-wards upon your Brethren the Scots,
who (being first instigated by that crafty _Cardinal_ [SN: Richlieu] to
disturb the groth of the incomparable _Church of England_, and so
consequently the tranquility of a Nation, whose expedition at the Isle of
_Ree_, gave terrour to the French) made Reformation their pretence, to
gratifie their own avarice, introduce themselves, and a more then
_Babylonish_ Tyranny, imposing upon the Church and state, beyond all
impudence or example. _I_ say, look upon what they have gotten, by
deceiving their Brethren, selling their King, betraying his Son, and by
all their perfidie; but a slavery more then _Egyptian_, and an infamy as
unparallel'd, as their treason and ingratitude.

Look neerer home on those whom they had ingaged amongst us here, & tell me
if there be a Person of them left, that can shew me his prize, unless it
be that of his Sacriledg, which he, or his Nephews must certainly vomite
up again: What is become of this ignorant and furious zeal, this pretence
of an universall perfection in the Religious and the Secular, after all
that Blood and Treasure, Rapine and Injustice, which has been exhausted,
and perpetrated by these Sons of Thunder? Where is the King, whom they
swear to make so glorious, but meant it in his _Martyrdome_? Where is the
Classis, and the Assembly, the Lay-elder; all that geare of Scottish
discipline, and the fine new Trinkets of Reformation? Were not all these
taken out of their hand, while now they were in the height of their pride
and triumph? And their dull Generall made to serve the execution of their
Sovereign, and then to be turn'd off himself, as a property no more of use
to their designes? Their riches and their strength in which they trusted,
and the Parliament which they even idoliz'd, in sum, the prey they had
contended for at the expence of so much sin and damnation, seizd upon by
those very instruments, which they had rais'd to serve their insatiable
avarice, and prodigious disloyalty. For so it pleased God to chastise
their implacable persecution of an excellent Prince, with a slavery under
such a _Tyrant_, as not being contented to butcher even some upon the
Scaffold, sold divers of them for slaves, and others he exild into cruell
banishment, without pretence of Law, or the least commiseration; that
those who before had no mercy on others, might find none themselves; till
upon some hope of their repentance, and future moderation, it pleased God
to put his hook into the nostrills of that proud _Leviathan_, and send him
to his place, after he had thus mortified the fury of the Presbyterians.
For unlesse God himself should utter his voice from Heaven, _yea, and that
a mighty voice_, can there any thing in the world be more evident, then
his indignation at those wretches and barefac't Impostors, who, one after
another, usurped upon us, taking them off at the very point of aspiring,
and præcipitating the glory and ambition of these men, before those that
were, but now, their adorers, and that had prostituted their consciences
to serve their lusts? To call him the _Moses_, the _Man of God_, the
_Joshua_, the _Saviour_ of _Israel_; and after all this, to treat the
_Thing_ his son with addresses no lesse then blasphemous, whose Father (as
themselves confess to be the most infamous Hypocrite and profligate
Atheist of all the Usurpers that ever any age produc'd) had made them his
Vassalls, and would have intaild them so to his posterity for ever?

But behold the scean is again changed, not by the Royall party, the Common
Enemy, or a forreign power; but by the despicable _Rumpe_ of a Parliament,
which that _Mountebanke_ had formerly serv'd himself of, and had rais'd
him to that pitch, and investiture: But see withall, how soon these
triflers and puppets of policy are blown away, with all their pack of
modells and childish _Chimæras_, nothing remaining of them but their
Coffine, guarded by the Souldiers at Westminster; but which is yet lesse
empty then the heads of those Polititians, which so lately seemed to fill
it.

For the rest, I despise to blot paper with a recitall of those wretched
_Interludes, Farces and Fantasms_, which appear'd in the severall
intervalls; because they were nothing but the effects of an extream
gyddiness, and unparallel'd levity. Yet these are those various
despensations and providences in your journey to that _holy land_ of
purchases and profits, to which you have from time to time appeal'd for
the justification of your proceedings, whilst they were, indeed, no other
then the manifest judgments of God upon your rebellion and your ambition:
I say nothing of your hypocriticall fasts, and pretended humiliations,
previous to the succeeding plots, and supposititious Revelations, that
_the godly might fall into the hands of your Captains_, because they were
bugbears, and became ridiculous even to the common people.

And now _Sr._ if you please, let us begin to set down the product and
survey the successe of your party and after all these faces and vertigo's
tell me ingenuously, if the single chastisment which is fallen upon one
afflicted man, and his loyall subjects, distressed by the common event of
war, want of treasure, the seizure of his Fleet, forcing him from his
City, and all the disadvantages that a perfidious people could imagine;
but in fine the crowning him with a glorious _Martyrdome_ for the Church
of God and the liberty of his people (for which his blood doth yet cry
aloud for vengeance) be comparable to the confusion which you (that have
been the conquerours) have suffered, and the slavery which you are like to
leave to the posterities which will be born but to curse you, and to groan
under the pressures which you bequeath to your own flesh & blood? For to
what a condition you have already reduced this once flourishing kingdom,
since all has been your own, let the intolerable oppressions, taxes,
Excises, sequestrations confiscations, plunders, customes, decimations,
not to mention the plate, even to very thimbles and the bodkins (for even
to these did your avarice descend) and other booties, speak. All this
dissipated and squandred away, to gratifie a few covetous and ambitious
wretches, whose appetites are as deep as hell, and as insatiable as the
grave; as if (as the Wise-man speaks) _our time here were but a market for
gain_.

Look then into the Churches, and manners of the people, even amongst your
own _Saints_, and tell me, if since _Simon Magus_ was upon the earth,
there were ever heard of so many _Schismes_, and _Heresies_, of _Jewes_
and _Socinians_, _Quakers_, _Fifth-monarchy-men_, _Arians_, _Anabaptists_,
_Independents_, and a thousand severall forts of _Blasphemies_ and
professed _Atheists_, all of them spawned under your government; and then
tell me what a Reformation of Religion you have effected?

Was there ever in the whole Earth (not to mention Christendom alone) a
perjury so prodigious, and yet so avowed as that by which you have taken
away the estate of my L. _Craven_, at which the very _Infidels_ would
blush, a _Turke_ or _Sythian_ stand amaz'd?

Under the Sun was it never heard, that a man should be condemned for
transgressing no law, but that which was made after the fact, and
abrogated after execution; that the Posterities to come might not be
witnesses of your horrid injustice: Yet thus you proceeded against my _L.
Stafford_. How many are those gallant persons whom after articles of war,
you have butchered in cold-blood, violating your promises against the
Lawes of all Nations, civill or barbarous; and yet thus you dealt in the
case of my L. _Capel_, Sr. _J. Stawel_ and others.

Is not the whole nation become sullen and proud, ignorant and suspicious,
incharitable, curst, and in fine, the most depraved and perfidious under
heaven? And whence does all this proceed, but from the effects of your own
examples, and the impunity of evill doers?

I need not tell you how long Justice has been sold by the _Committees_,
and the Chair-men, the Sequestrators and Simoniacall Tryers, not to
mention the late Courtiers, and a swarm of _Publicans_ who _have eaten up
the People as if they would eat bread_.

Will you come now to the particular mis-fortunes, and the evident hand of
God upon you for these actions (for he has not altogether left us without
some expresse witnesses of his displeasure at your doings,) Behold then
your _Essex_ and your _Warwick_, your _Ferfaix_, and your _Waller_, (whom
once your Books stiled the _Lord of Hosts_) Cashiered, Imprisoned,
Suspected and Disgraced after all their Services. _Hotham_, and his _Son_
came to the block; _Stapleton_ had the buriall of an Asse, and was thrown
into a Town Ditch; _Brookes_ and _Hamden_ signally slain in the very act
of Rebellion and Sacriledge; your atheisticall _Dorislaw_, _Ascam_ and the
Sodomiticall _Ariba_, whom though they escaped the hand of Justice, yet
_Vengeance_ would not suffer to live: What became of _Rainsborough_?
_Ireton_ perished of the Plague, and _Hoyle_ hanged himself; _Staplie_
'tis said, died mad, and _Cromwell_ in a fit of raging; and if there were
any others worthy the taking notice of, I should give you a list of their
names and of their destinies; but it was not known whence they came which
succeeded them; nor had they left any memory behind them, but for their
signal wickednesses, as he that set on fire the _Ephesian Temple_ to be
recorded a Villain to posterity. Whereas those noble souls whom your
inhumanity, (not your vertue) betrayed, gave proof of their extraction,
Innocency, Religion and Constancy under all their Tryals and Tormentors;
and those that dyed by the sword, fell in the bed of honour, and did
worthily for their Country; their _Loyalty_ and their _Religion_ will be
renowned in the History of Ages, and pretious to their memory, when your
names will rot with your Carkasses, and your remembrance be as dung upon
the face of the Earth. For there is already no place of _Europe_ where
your infamy is not spread; whilst your persecuted brethren rejoyce in
their sufferings, can abound, and can want, blush not at their actions,
nor are ashamed at their addresses; because they have suffered for that
which their Faith and their Birth, their Lawes and their Liberties have
celebrated with the most glorious Inscriptions, and Everlasting Elogies.

And if fresher instances of all these particulars be required, cast your
eye a little upon the _Armies pretended Plea_, which came lately a birding
to beat the way before them, charm the ears of the Vulgar, and captivate
the people; That after all its _pseudo-politicks_ and irreligious
principles, is at last constrained to acknowledg _your open and prodigious
violations, strange and illegal Actions, (as in termes it confesses) of
taking up Armes, Raising and Forming Armies against the King, fighting
against his Person, Imprisoning, Impeaching, Arraigning, Trying and
Executing Him: Banishing his Children, abolishing Bishops, Deans and
Chapters; taking away Kingly Government, and the House of Lords, breaking
the Crowns, selling the Jewells, Plate, Goods, Houses and Lands belonging
unto the Kings of this Nation, erecting extraordinary High Courts of
Justice, and therein Impeaching, Arraigning, condemning, and Executing
many pretended notorious Enemies, to the publick Peace; when the Lawes in
being, and the Ordinary Courts of Justice could not reach them: By strange
and unknown practises in this Nation, and not at all Justifiable by any
known Lawes and Statutes_, But by certain diabolical principles of late
distilled into some person of the Army, and which he would entitle to the
whole, who (abating some of their Commanders, that have sucked the sweet
of this Doctrine) had them never so much as entred into their thoughts,
nor could they be so depraved, though they were Masters only of the Light
of Nature to direct them. For Common sence will tell them, that whoever
are our lawful Superiours, and invested with the supreame Authority,
either by their own vertue, or the peoples due Election, have then a just
right to challenge submission to their precepts, and that we acquiesce in
their determinations; since there is in nature no other expedient to
preserve us from everlasting confusion: But it is the height of all
impertinency to conceive, that those which are a part of themselves, and
can in so great a Body, have no other interests, should (without the
manifest hand of God were in it to infatuate all your proceedings) fall
into such exorbitant contradiction to their own good, as a child of four
years old would not be guilty of; and as this Pamphleter wildly suggests
in pp. 6. 11. 27, &c. did they steer their course by the known laws of the
Land, and as obedient Subjects should do, who without the King and his
Peers, are but the Carkass of a Parliament, as destitute of the Soul which
should inform and give it being. And if so small a handful of men as
appeared in the Palace-Yard, without consent of a quarter of the English
Army, much lesse the tenthousand'th part of the Free-people that are not
clad in red, shall disturb and alter your Government when it thinks fit to
set aside a few imperious Officers, who plainly seek themselves, and
derive their Commissions from superiours to whom they swear obedience; how
can you ever hope, or live to see any government established in these
miserably abused Nations? Behold then with how weak a party you are
vanquish'd, even by those very instruments you had so long flatter'd with
the title of the _Free-people_; imputing all the direful effects of your
depraved principles to their desires, when as I dare report my self to the
ingenuity of the very Souldiers themselves, if they, who have effected all
these changes by your wretched instigations, and blind pretences, imagine
themselves the People of this Nation, but are{1} a very small portion of
them, compared to the whole, and who are maintained by them to recover,
and protect the Civill Government, according to the Good old Lawes of the
Land; not such as they themselves shall invent from Day to Day, or as the
interests of some few persons may engage them.

But if the essential end of Rulers be the Common peace, and their Lawes
obliging as they become relative: Restore us then to those under which we
lived with so much sweetness and tranquility, as no age in the World, no
Government under Heaven could ever pretend the like. And if the People (as
you declare) are to be the Judges of it, summon them together in a Free
Parliament, according to its legal Constitution; or make a universal
_Balott_, and then let it appear, if _Collonel Lambert_ and half a dozen
Officers, with all their seduced Partizans, make so much as a single
_Cypher_ to the _Summe Total_. And this shall be enough to answer those
devious Principles set down in the porch of that specious Edifice; which
being erected upon the Sand, will (like the rest that has been _daubed
with untempered mortar_) sink also at the next high wind that blowes upon
it. But I am glad it is at last avowed, upon what pretexts that late
pretended Parliament have pleaded on the behalf of themselves and party,
their discharge from all the former Protestations, Engagements, solemn
Vowes, Covenants, with hands (as you say) lift up to the most high God, as
also their Oaths and Allegiance, &c. because I shall not in this discourse
be charged with slandering of them, and that the whole World may detest
the Actions of such perfidious Infidels, with whom nothing sacred has
remain'd inviolable.

But there is yet a piece of Artifice behind, of no less consequence then
the former, and that is, a seeking to perswade the present Army, that
_They_ were the men, who first engaged thus solemnly to destroy the
Government under which they were born, and reduce it to this miserable
condition: whereas it is well known by such as converse daily with them,
that there is hardly one of ten amongst them, who was then in Armes; and
that it was the Zelots under _Essex_, and the succeeding Generals, who
were the persons whose perfidiousness{2} he makes so much use of, and that
the present Army consists of a far more ingenuous spirit, and might in one
moment vindicate this aspersion, make their conditions with all advantage,
and these Nations the most happy People upon the Earth, as it cannot be
despaired but they will one day do, when by the goodness of Almighty God,
they shall perfectly discern through the mist which you have cast upon
their eyes, lest they should discover the Imposture of these _Egyptian_
Sorcerers.

And now, _Sir_, if after all this injustice, and impiety on your parts,
you have prosecuted that with the extreamest madness, which you esteemed
criminal in your enemies, _viz._ _To arrogate the supream power in a
single person;{3} condemn men without Law; execute, and proscribe them
with as little: Imprest for your Service, violate your Parliaments,
dispense with your solemn Oaths_; in summe, _to mingle Earth and Heaven by
your arbitrary proceedings_: All which, not only your printed books, this
pretended _plea_; but your Actions have abundantly declared; have you not
justified the Royal party, and pronounced them the only honest men which
have appeared upon the stage, in Characters as plain, that he which runs
may read, whilst yet you persecute them to the death? _Therefore, thou
art inexcusable, O Man, that _perpetratest_ these things; For wherein thou
judgest another, thou condemnest thy self, seeing thou that judgest doest
the same things. But thinkest thou this O Man, that thus judgest them
which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the
_vengeance_ of God? I tell ye nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish._

Truly, _Sir_, when I compare these things together, and compare them I do
very often, consider the purchases which you have made, and the damnation
you have certainly adventured; the despite you have done to the name of
Christ, the Laws of Common humanity which you have violated, the malice
and the folly of your proceedings; in fine, the confusion which you have
brought upon the Church, the State, and your selves; I adore the just and
righteous judgment of God; and (howsoever you may possibly emerge, and
recover the present rout) had rather be a sufferer among those whom you
have thus afflicted, and thus censure, then to enjoy the pleasures of your
sins for that season you are likely to possess them: For if an Angel from
Heaven should tell me you had done your duties, I would no more believe
him, then if he should preach another Gospel, then that which has been
delivered to us; because you have blasphemed that holy profession, and
done violence to that Gracious Spirit, by whose sacred dictates you are
taught to live in obedience to your Superiours, and in Charity to one
another; covering yet all this _Hydra_ of Impostures with a mask Of Piety
and Reformation, whilst you breath nothing but oppression, and lye in wait
to deceive. But _O God! how long shall the Adversary do this dishonour,
how long shall the Enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever? They gather them
together against the soul of the Righteous, and condemn the innocent
blood. Lo these are the ungodly, these prosper in the World, and these
have riches in possession: And I said, then have I cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocency. Yea, and I had almost said as
they; but lo, then I should have condemned the generation of thy Children.
Then thought I to understand this, but it was too hard for me, untill I
went into the Sanctuary of God; then understood I the end of these Men.
Namely, how thou dost set them in slippery places, castest them down and
destroyest them._

       *       *       *       *       *

    _O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearfull end!_

We have seen it, indeed _Sir_, we have seen it, and we cannot but
acknowledge it the very finger of God, _mirabile in oculis nostris_; and
is that, truly, which even constrains me out of Charity to your Soul, as
well as out of a deep sense of your Honour, and the Friendship which I
otherwise bear you, to beseech you to re-enter into your self, to abandon
those false Principles, to withdraw your self from these Seducers, to
repent of what you have done, _and save your self from this untoward
Generation_: There is yet a door of Repentance open, do not provoke the
Majesty of the great God any longer, which yet tenders a Reconciliation
to you. Remember what was once said over the perishing _Jerusalem_. _How
often would I have gathered you together, as a hen doth gather her brood
under her winge, and ye would not? Behold, your _House_ is left unto you
desolate._--For do not think it impossible, that we should become the most
abandon'd, and barbarous of all the nations under heaven. You know who has
said it: _He turneth a fruitfull land into a Wildernesse, for the iniquity
of them that inhabit therein._ And truly, he that shall seriously consider
the sad _Catastrophe_ of the _Eastern Empire_, so flourishing in piety,
policy, knowledg, literature, and all the excellencies of a happy and
blessed people; would almost think it impossible, that in so few years,
and a midst so glorious a light of learning and Religion, so suddain, and
palpable a darknesse, so strange and horrid a barbarity should over-spread
them, as now we behold in all that goodly tract of the _Turkish_
dominions: And what was the cause of all this, but the giddinesse of a
wanton people, the Schisms and the Heresies in the church, and the
prosperous successes of a rebellious _Impostor_, whose steps we have
pursued in so many pregnant instances; giving countenance to those unheard
of impieties, and delusions, as if God be not infinitely merciful, must
needs involve us under the same disasters? For, whilst there is no order
in the Church, no body of Religion agreed upon, no government established,
and that every man is abandoned to his own deceitfull heart: whilst
learning is decried, and honesty discountenanc'd, rapine defended, and
vertue finds no advocate; what can we in reason expect, but the most
direfull expressions of the wrath of God, a universall desolation, when by
the industry of _Sathan_ and his crafty Emissaries, some desperate
_enthusiasme_, compounded (like that of _Mohomet_,) of Arian, Socinian,
Jew, Anabaptist, and the impurer _Gnostick_, something I say made up of
all these heresies, shall diffuse it self over the Nation, in a universall
contagion, and nothing lesse appear then the _Christian_ which we have
ingratefully renounced?

_For this plague is already beginning amongst us, and there is none to
take the Censer, and to stand between the living and the dead, that we be
not consumed as in a moment; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord._
Let us then _depart from the tents of these wicked men_ (who have brought
all this upon us) _and touch nothing of theirs, lest we be consumed in all
their sins_.

But you will say, the King is not to be trusted: judg not of others by
your selves; did ever any man observe the least inclination of revenge in
his breast? has he not betides the innate propensity of his own nature to
gentlenesse, the strict injunctions of a dying father and a _Martyr_, to
forgive even greater offenders then you are? Yes, I dare pronounce it with
confidence, and avouch it whith all assurance, that there is not an
individuall amongst you, whose crimes are the most crimson, whom he will
not be most ready to pardon, and graciously receive upon their repentance;
nor any thing that can be desired of him, to which he would not cheerfully
accommode, for the stopping of that torrent of blood, and extream
confusion, which has hitherto run, and is yet imminent over us. Do but
reason a little with your self, and confider sadly, whether a young
Prince, mortified by so many afflictions, disciplin'd by much experience,
and instructed by the miscarriages of others, be not the most excellently
qualified to govern and reduce a people, who have so succeslesly tried so
many governments, of old, impious and crafty Foxes, that have exercised
upon us the most intollerable Tyrannies that were ever heard of?

But you object further, that he has lived amongst Papists, is vitiously
inclin'd, and has wicked men about him: What can be said more unjustly,
what more malitious? And can _you_ have the foreheads to tell us he has
lived amongst Papists to his prejudice, who have proscrib'd him from
Protestants, persecuted him from place to place, _as a Patridg on the
Mountains_? You may remember who once went to _Achich the King of Gath and
changed his behaviour before them, and fain'd himself mad in their hands_;
had many great infirmities, and _was yet a man after Gods own heart_;
Whilst the Catholick King was your Allie, you had nothing to do with
Papists, it was then no crime: _God is not mocked, away with this respect
of persons_: But where is it you would have him to be? The _Hollander_
dares not afford him harbour, lest you refuse them yours: The _French_ may
not give him bread for fear of offending you; and unless he should go to
the _Indies_, or the _Turk_ (where yet your malice would undoubtedly reach
him) where can he be safe from your revenge? But suppose him in a Papist
Countrey, constrained thereto by your incharity to his Soul as well as
body; would he have condescended to half so much, as you have offered for
a toleration of Papists, he needed not now have made use of this Apology,
or wanted the assistance of the most puissant Princes of _Christendome_ to
restore him, of whom he has refused such conditions as in prudence he
might have yielded to, and the people would have gladly received; whilst
those who know with what persons you have transacted, what truck you have
made with the _Jesuites_, what secret Papists there are amongst you, may
easily divine why they have been no forwarder to assist him, and how far
distant he is from the least wavering in his Faith. But since you have now
declared that you will tollerate all Religions, without exception; do not
think it a sin in him, to gratifie those that shall most oblige him.

For his vertues and Morality, I provoak the most refined Family in this
Nation to produce me a Relation of more piety and moderation; shew me a
Fraternity more spotlesse in their honour, and freer from the exorbitances
of youth, then these three Brothers, so conspicuous to all the world for
their Temperance, Magnanimity, Constancy, and Understanding; a friendship
and humility unparallel'd, and rarely to be found amongst the severest
persons, scarcely in a private family. It is the malice of a very black
Soul, and a virulent _Renegado_ (of whom to be commended were the utmost
infamy) that has interpreted some compliances, to which persons in
distress are sometimes engaged, with those whom they converse withall, to
his Majesties disadvantage: _whilst these filthy dreamers defile the flesh
themselves, and thinking it no sin to despise dominion, speak evill of
dignities, and of the things which they know not. But woe unto them, for
they have gone in the way of Kain, and run greedily after the errour of
Balaam, for reward, having mens persons in admiration because of
advantage._

For the rest, I suppose the same was said of Holy _David_, when in his
extream calamity, he was constrain'd to fly from _Saul_. _For every one
that was in distresse, and every one that was in debt, and every one that
was discontented, gathered themselves unto him, and he became Captain over
them._ And to this retinue, has your malice and persecution reduced this
excellent Prince; but he that preserv'd him in the Wood, _and delivered
David out of all his troubles_, shall likewise in his appointed time,
deliver him also out of these distresses.

I have now answered all your calumnies, and have but a word to add, that I
may yet incline you to accept of your best interest, and prevent that
dreadfull ruine which your obstinacy does threaten. Is it not as
perspicuous as the Sun, that it lies in your power to reform his Counsell,
introduce your selves, make what composition you can desire, have all the
security that mortall men can imagine, and the greatest Princes of Europe
to engage in the performance? This were becoming worthy men, and
honourable indeed; this ingenuous self-denyall: And it is no disgrace to
reforme a mistake, but to persist in it lyes the shame. The whole Nation
require it of you, and the lawes of God command it, you cannot, you must
not deferr it. For what can you pretend that will not then drop into your
bosomes? The humble man will have repose, the aspiring and ambitious,
honours: The Merchant will be secure, Trades immediately recover, Aliances
will be confirm'd, the Lawes reflourish, tender Consciences consider'd,
present purchasers satisfied; the Souldier payed, maintained and provided
for; and what's above all this, Christianity and Charity will revive again
amongst us, _Mercy and Truth will meet together; righteousness and peace
shall kiss each other_.

But let us now consider on the other side, the confusion, which must of
necessity light upon us if we persist in our rebellion and obstinacy; We
are already impoverisht, and consum'd with war and the miseries that
attend it; you have wasted our treasure, and destroyed the Woods, spoyled
the Trade, and shaken our properties; a universall animosity is in the
very bowells of the Nation; the Parent against the Children, and the
Children against the Parents, betraying one another to the death; in
summe, if that have any truth which our B. _Saviour_ has himself
pronounced, _That a Kingdome divided cannot stand_, it is impossible we
should subsist in the condition we are reduc'd to. Consider we again, how
ridiculous our late proceedings have made us to our neighbours round about
us. Their _Ministers_ laugh at our extream{4} giddinesse, and we seem to
mock at their addresses: for no sooner do their _Credentialls_ arrive,
but behold the scean is changed, and the Government is fled, he that now
acted King, left a fool in his place, and they stand amazed at out
_Buffoonery_ and madnesse.

What then may we imagine will be the product of all these disadvantages,
when the Nations that deride and hate us, shall be united for our
destruction; and that the harvest is ripe for the sickle of their fury?
shall we not certainly be a prey to an inevitable ruine, having thus
weakned our selves by a brutish civill war, and cut off those glorious
_Heros_, the wise and the valiant, whose courage in such a calamity we
shall in vain imploar, that would bravely have sacrificed themselves for
our delivery? Let us remember how often we have served a forraign people,
and that there is nothing so confident, but a provoked God can overthrow.

For my part, I tremble, but to consider what may be the issue of these
things, when our iniquities are full, and that God shall make inquisition
for the bloud that has been spilt; unlesse we suddainly meet him by an
unfained repentance, and turn from all the abominations by which we have
provoaked him; And then, it is to be hoped, that he who would have
compounded with the _Father of the faithfull_, had there been but ten
Righteous men in _Sodom_; and that spared _Nineveh_ that populous and
great City; will yet have mercy on us, hearken to the prayers, and have
regard to the teares, of so many Millions of people, who day and night do
interceed with him: The _Priests_ and Ministers _of the Lord weeping
between the porch and the Altar, and saying, Spare thy people O Lord,
spare thy People, and give not thine Inheritance to reproach_.

And now I have said what was upon my Spirit for your sake, when, for the
satisfaction of such as (through its effect upon your soule) this Addresse
of mine may possibly come to, I have religiously declared, that the Person
who writ it, had no unworthy or sinister design of his owne to gratifie,
much lesse any other party whatever; as being neither _Courtier_,
_Souldier_, or _Church-man_, but a plain Country Gentleman, engag'd on
neither side, who, has had leisure, (through the goodnesse of God)
candidly, and without passion to examine the particulars which he has
touched, and expects no other reward in the successe of it, then what
_Christ_ has promised in the _Gospels_: The _Benediction{5} of the peace
maker_; and which he already feels in the discharge of his Conscience
being for his own particular, long since resolv'd with himself, to persist
in his Religion, and his loyalty to the death; come what will; as
wrongfully perswaded, that all the persecutions, losses, and other
accidents which may arrive him for it here, _are not worthy to be compared
to that eternall{6} weight of glory which is to be revealed hereafter_;
and to the inexpressible consolation, which it will afford on his
_Death-bed_, when all these guilded pleasures will disappear, this noise,
and empty pompe, when God shall _set all out sins in order before us_; and
when, it is certain, that the humble, and the peaceable, the charitable
and the meek shall not loose their reward, not change their hopes, for all
the Crownes and the Scepters, the Lawrells and the Trophies which
ambitious and self seeking men contend for, with so much Tyrannie and
injustice.

Let them therefore no longer deceive you, dear Sr. and as the guise of
these vile men is, tell you they are the Godly-party, under which for the
present they would pass, and _courage themselves in their wickedness_,
stoping their ears, and shutting their eyes against all that has been
taught and practised by the best of Christians, & holiest of Saints these
sixteen hundred years: _You shall know them by their fruites, do men
gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figs of Thistles?_ But so, being miserably
gall'd with the remembrance of their impieties, and the steps by which
they have ascended to those fearfull precepices, they seek to allay the
secret pangs of a gnawing worme, by adopting the most prodigious of their
crimes into a Religion fitted for the purpose, and versatile as their
giddy interest, till at last, encourag'd by the number of thriving
Proselytes and successes, they grow feared and confident; swallowing all
with ease, and passing from one heresie to another; whilst yet they are
still pursued, and shalt never be at repose: For Conscience will at last
awake, and then how frightful, how deplorable, yea, how inexpressably sad
will that day be unto them! _For these things have they done, and I held
my tongue _(saith God)_ and they thought wickedly, that I am such a one as
themselves; but I will reprove them and set before them the things that
they have done. O consider this ye that forget God, least he pluck you
away, and there be none to deliver you!_

And now _Sir_, you see the liberty which I have taken, and how farr I have
adventured to testifie a friendship which I have ever professed for you: I
have indeed been very bold; but it was greatly requisite; and you know
that amongst all men there are none which more openly use the freedom of
reprehension, then those who love most: Advices are not rejected by any,
but such as determine to pursue their evill courses; and the language
which I use, is not to offend, but to beseech you to return. I conjure you
therefore to re-enter into your self, and not to suffer these mean and
dishonourable respects, which are unworthy your nobler spirit, to prompt
you to a course so deform'd, and altogether unworthy your education and
Family. Behold your friends all deploaring your misfortunes, and your
Enemies even pitie you; whilst to gratifie a few mean and desperate
persons, you cancell your duty to your prince, and disband your Religion;
dishonour your name, bring ruine and infamy on your posterity.

But when all this shall fail (as God forbid a title of it should) _I_ have
yet this hope remaining; that when you have been sufficiently fated with
this wicked course, wandred from place to place, government to government,
sect to sect, in so universal a deluge, and find no repose for the sole of
your foot (as it is certain you never shal) you with at last with the
peaceful _Dove_, return to the Arke from whence you fled, to your first
principles, and to sober counsels; or with the repenting _Prodigall_ in
the Gospel, to _your Father_ which is in heaven, and to the _Father of
your Countrey_: For in so doing, you shall not only rejoyce your servant,
and all good men, but the very _Angels_ which are in heaven, and who are
never said to rejoyce indeed, but _at the Conversion of a sinner_.

_This 27. Octob. 1659_

_Et tu conversus, converte Fratres._


PSAL. 37.

_10. Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone, thou shalt
look after his place, and he shall be away._

_36. I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and flourishing like
a green Bay-tree._

_37. I went by, and lo he was gone; I sought him, but his place could no
where be found._

_38. Keep innocency, and take heed unto the thing that is right: For that
shall bring a Man peace at the last._

       *       *       *       *       *

I request the _Reader_ to take notice, that where, mentioning the
_Presbyterian_, I have let fall expressions, somewhat relishing of more
then usuall asperity; I do by no means intend it to the prejudice of many
of that Judgment, who were either men of peaceable spirits from the
beginning; or that have of late given testimony of the sense of their
errour, whilst they were abused by those specious pretences I have
reproved; but I do regard them with as much charity and affection, as
becomes a sincere Christian, and their Brother.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *




A
P A N E G Y R I C
TO
Charles the Second,
PRESENTED
TO HIS MAJESTIE
The [HW: 1st X crossed out]XXXIII. of _APRIL_, being the Day
OF HIS
CORONATION.
MDCLXI.

       *       *       *       *       *

By _JOHN EVELYN_, Esquire

       *       *       *       *       *

_LONDON_,
Printed for _John Crooke_, and are to be sold at the Ship in
St. _Paul's_ Church-Yard.




A
PANEGYRIC
TO
CHARLES the II.
PRESENTED
TO HIS MAJESTY
On the Day of His INAUGURATION,
_April 23._ MDCLXI.


I have decreed with myself (O best and greatest of Kings!) to publish the
just resentiments of a heart, perfectly touch'd with the Joy and Universal
Acclamations of your People, for your this dayes Exaltation and glorious
investiture. And truly, it was of custome us'd to good and gracious
Princes, upon lesser occasions, to pronounce and celebrate their merits
with Elogies and Panegyrics; but if ever they were due, it is to your
Majesty this Day; because as your Virtues are superiour to all that pass'd
before you; so is the Conjuncture, and the steps by which you are happily
ascended to it, Miraculous, and alltogether stupendious: So that what the
former Ages might produce to deprecate their fears, or flatter the
Inclinations of a Tyrant, we offer spontaneously, and by Instinct, without
Artifice to your Serene Majesty, our just and rightfull Soveraign. And if
in these expressions of it, and the formes we use, it were possible to
exceed, and so offend your Modesty; herein only (great Sir) do we not fear
to disobey you; since it is not in your power to deny us our rejoycing,
nor indeed in ours, to moderate. Permit us therefore (O best of Kings) to
follow our genius, and to consecrate your Name, and this dayes exaltation
to that posterity which you alone have preserved, and which had certainly
seen its period, but for your happy Restauration; so that your Majesty
does not so much accept a benefit from, as give it to your Subjects. For
though the fulness of this Dayes joy, be like the seven years of plenty;
yet, is that bread far more sweet, which is eaten with remembrance of the
past Famine (too bitter, alas! to be forgotten on the suddain) especially,
when it may serve to illustrate our present felicity, and conduce to your
Majesties glory: For so the skillful Artist, studious of making a
surprising peice, or representing some irradiated Deity, deepens the
shadowes sometimes with the darkest touches, and approaching to horrour
it self, thereby to render his lights the more refulgent, and striking in
the eyes of the Spectator.

Let us then call to mind (and yet for ever cursed be the memory of it)
those dismal clouds, which lately orespread us, when we served the lusts
of those immane Usurpers, greedy of power, that themselves might be under
none; Cruel, that they might murther the Innocent without cause; Rich,
with the publick poverty; strong, by putting the sword into the hands of
furies, and prosperous by unheard of perfidie. Armies, Battails,
Impeaching, Imprisonment, Arraining, Condemning, Proscribing, Plundring,
Gibbets and Executions were the eloquent expressions of our miseries:
There was no language then heard but of Perjury, Delusion, Hypocrisie{7},
Heresie, Taxes, Excises, Sequestration, Decimation, and a thousand like
barbarities: In summe, the solitudes were filled with noble Exiles, the
Cities with rapacious Theives, the Temples with Sacrilegious Villains;
They had the spoiles of Provinces, the robbing of Churches, the goods of
the slain, the Stock of Pupils, the plunder of Loyal Subjects; no
Testament, no State secure, and nothing escaped their cruelty and
insatiable avarice. For if it be sweet in prosperity, to consider of the
past adventures, if tempests commend the Haven; War, Peace; and our last
sharp sickness, our present Health and Vigour; why should it not delight
your Majesty to hear of the miseries we have suffered; since they
re-inforce your own felicity, and the benefits which we receive by it?
where then should I begin but with thy Calamities, O unfortunate
_England_! who hadst only the priviledge of being miserable, when all the
World were happy: But I will not go too for in repeating the sorrowes
which are vanish't, or uncover the buried memory of the evils past; least
whilst we strive to represent the vices of others, we seem to contaminate
your Sacred purple, or alloy our present rejoycing; since that only is
sign of a perfect and consummate felicity, when even the very remembrance
of evils past, is quite forgotten.

Miraculous Reverse! O marvel greater then Mans Counsel! who will believe
that which his eyes do see? what before a twenty years confusion had
destroy'd; behold a few moneths have restor'd: But the wonder does yet so
much more astonish, that the grief was not so universal for having
suffer'd under such a Tyranny, as for having been so long depriv'd of so
excellent a Prince: No more then do we henceforth accuse our past
miseries; All things are by your presence repair'd, and so reflourish; as
if they even rejoyc'd they had once been destroy'd, _Auctior tuis facta
beneficiis._ So as not only a Diadem binds your sacred Temples this day;
but you have even crown'd all your Subjects too; so has your auspicious
presence gilded all things; our Churches, Tribunals, Theaters, Palaces,
lift up their heads again; the very fields do laugh and exalt. O happy,
and blessed spring! not so glorious yet with the pride and enamel of his
flowers, the golden corn, and the gemms of the pregnant Vine, as with
those Lillies and Roses which bloom and flourish in your Chaplet this day,
to which not only these, but even all the productions of nature seem to
bend, and pay their homage.

And let it be a new year, a new _Æra_, to all the future Generations, as
it is the beginning of this, and of that immense, _Platonic_ Revolution;
for what could arrive more justly, more stupendious, were even the eight
sphear it self now hurled about? For no sooner came our _CHARLES_ on
shore, but every Man was in the Haven where he would be; the storm
Universally ceas'd, and every one ran forth to see our _Palladium, tanquam
coelo delapsum_: Virgins, Children, Women, trembling old Men, venerating
the very ship that wafted our _Jason_ and his _Heroes_, ravish'd with the
sight, yet hardly believing for astonishment; the greatness of the
miracle, oppressing our sences, and endangering our very faith.

    _Credetne hoc olim ventura posteritas?_

I would prayse you Great Prince, but having begun; where shall I make an
end? since there remains not a Topic through all that kind, but one might
write Decads of it, without offending the truth, were it as secure of your
modesty; since I am as well to consider what your ears can suffer, as what
is owing to your Virtues: On what heads shall I extend then my discourse?
your Birth, Country, Form, Education, Manners, Studies, Friends, Honours
and Fortune run through all partitions of the Demonstrative: An Orator
could have nothing more to wish for, nor your Majesty to render you more
accomplish'd.

Shall I consider then your Majesty as you were a Son to that glorious
Father before his _Apotheosis_? As you were your self a Confessor after
it; As you are now thus day in your Zenith and exaltation; and as we
Augure you will by Gods blessing prove to your Subjects hereafter: For
even through all these does our prospect lead us; Nor may it be objected
that what shall be spoken of your Majesty, can be applied to any other;
since the Fortune and Events of the rest of Princes, have been so
differing from yours; as seeming to have been conducted by Men alone, and
second Causes; yours only by God, and as it were by Miracle.

I begin then with your early Piety to that Kingly Martyr whose Sacred
dictates did institute your tender years, and whose sufferings were so
much alleviated by your Majesties early proficiency in all that might
presage a hopefull and glorious Successor: For so did you run through all
his Vicissitudes, during that implacable war, which sought nothing more
then to defeat you of all opportunities of a Princely education, as
fearing your future Virtues; because they knew the stock from whence you
sprung, was not to be destroy'd by wounding the body, so long as such a
Branch remained.

    _Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus
    Nigræ feraci frondis in Algido,
      Per damna, per cædes, ab ipso
      Ducit opes, animumque ferro._

Whilst he Reign'd and Govern'd, you learn'd only to obey; Living your own
Princely Impress; [SN: _ICH DIEN._] as knowing it would best instruct you
one day how to Command, and which we now see accomplish'd: These then are
the effects, when Princes are the Sons of Nobles; since only such know
best to support the weight, who use to bear betimes, and by degrees; not
those who rashly pull it on their shoulders; because they take it with
less violence, less ambition, less jealousie: None so secure a Prince, as
he that is so born.

But no sooner did that blessed Martyr expire, then our redivive
_Phoenix_ appear'd; rising from those Sacred Ashes Testator and Heir;
Father and yet Son; Another, and yet the same; introsuming as it were his
Spirit, as he breath'd it out, when singing his own Epicedium and
Genethliack together, he seem'd prodigal of his own life to have it
redouble'd in your felicity: Thus, _Rex nunquam moritur_. O admirable
conduct of the Divine Providence, to immortalize the image of a just
Monarch: _Ipsa quidem, sed non eadem, quia & ipsa, nec ipsa est._ Since
that may as truly be apply'd to your Majesty, which was once to the wisest
of Kings: _Mortuus est Pater ejus, & quasi non mortuus, similem enim
reliquit sibi post se._

But with how much prudence, is serenity attributed amongst the titles of
Princes, and the beams of the sun to irradiate their Crowns; That the
Scepter bears a Flower; since as that glorious planet produces, so does it
also wither them; and there is nothing lasting, save their vertues, which
are indeed their essential parts, and only immortal; For even yet did the
clouds intercept our day with the continuance of so dismall a storm, as it
obnubilated all those hopes of ours. It is an infinite adventure, if in a
Princes Family [HW: Firmament] (once overcast) it ever grow fair weather
again, but by a singular and extraordinary providence. I mention this to
increase the wonder, and reinforce your felicity. Empires passe, Kingdomes
are translated, and dominions cease: The _Cecropides_ of old, the
_Arsacides_, the _Theban_, _Corinthian_, _Syracusian_, and sundry more
lasted nor to the fourth Age without strange and prodigious tragedies; but
why go we so far back, when a few Centuries present us with so many fresh
Revolutions? How many nests has the _Roman_ Eagle changed? _Bulgarian_,
_Saracen_, _Latine_; In the _Comneni_, _Isaaci_, _Paleologi_, &c. even
till it dash'd it self in pieces against the _Oetoman_ rock. What
mutations have been in the house of _Arragon_? How many Riders has the
_Parthenopean_ horse unsaddl'd and flung? How many _Sicily_? What changes
have been in _Italy_, What in _France_, and indeed through all _Europe_ by
_Vandals_, _Saxons_, _Danes_, _Normans_, by external invasion, internal
Faction, Envy, Ambition, treachery and violence? The _Consulate_
degenerated into _Oligarchy_, which occasion'd the _Aventine_ sedition;
Democraty into _Ochlocraty_ under the _Tribunes_ and wicked _Gracchi_; and
_Monarchy_ it self, (the very best of Governments) into Tyranny.

Indeed your sacred Majesty was cast out of your Kingdoms, but could never
be thrown out of our hearts; There, you had a secure seat; and the Prince
that is inthron'd there, is safe in all mutations; Keep there Sir, and you
are inexpugnable, immoveable. And how should it otherwayes be? A Prince of
your virtue could not miscarry, that being truly verified of Your Majesty,
as well in your perfections, as your person, _Certe, videtis quem elegit
Dominus in Regem, quoniam non sit similis illi in omni populo._ Nature
design'd your Majesty a King, Fortune makes others; nor are you more your
peoples by birth, and a glorious _series_ of Progenitors, then by your
merits: This appeared in all those digits of your darkest Eclipse; The
defect was ours, not your Majesties. For the Sun is alwaies shining,
though men alwaies see him not; and since the too great splendor, and
prosperity did confound us, it pleased God to interpose those clouds, till
we should be better able to behold you with more reverence and security;
For then it was that you prepar'd your self for this weighty government,
and gave us those presages of your Virtue, by what you did, for your
people, and what you suffered for them; signalizing your Courage, your
Fortitude, Constancy, Piety, Prudence and Temperance upon all occasions.
Your Travels and Adventures are as far beyond those of _Ulysses_, as you
exceed him in Dominions; _Si quis enim velit percensere Cæsaris res, totum
profecto terrarum orbem enumeret_: For he must go very far that would sum
up your perfections: Your skill in the customes of Nations, the situations
of Kingdomes, the Advantages of places, the temper of the Climates; so as
the Ages to come shall tell with delight, where you fought valiantly,
where you suffered gallantly, _Quis sudores tuos hauserit campus, quæ
refectiones tuas arbores, quæ somnum saxa prætexerint, quod denique tectum
magnus hospes impleveris_, and all those sacred _Vestigia_ of yours: Thus
what was once applyed to _Trajan_, becomes due to your Majesty, and I my
self am witness both abroad, and at home, of what I pronounce, having now
beheld you in both fortunes with love and admiration; But this is not
halfe, and to stop at single perfections, were to give jealousie to the
rest yet untouched, and should I but succinctly number them all, were not
to weave a Panegyrick, but an Inventory.

But amongst all your Vertues none was more eminent then your constancy to
your religion, which no shocks of Fortune, no assaults of sophisters,
events and successe of adversaries, or offers of specious Friends could
shake; so great a thing it was that you did persevere, so much greater
_quod non timuisti ne perseverare non posses_.

But whilst Armies on earth fought for the Usurper, the Hosts of Heaven
fought in their courses for your Majesty; [SN: _Spaine._] dashing your
greatest enemy upon that Rock, which afforded you shelter, till that
Tyranny was over past: And how welcome to Us was that blessed day _qui
tyrannum abstulit pessimum, Principem dedit optimum_! He liv'd by storming
others, dyed in one himself, _& post Nubila, Phoebus_. Yet did not that
quite dissolve our fears, till that other head of _Hydra_ was cut off,
that despicable Rump which succeeded, not by the sword, or any humane
addresse, least we should sacrifice to our own Nets; but by the immediate
hand of heaven, without noise, without Armes, or stratageme, the fame of
your vertues, more then the sense of our own misery, universally turning
the hearts even of your very Enemies; and then that Northern Star began
the dawning of this day, till your nearer approach did guild our Horizon,
brighter then the rayes of the Eastern sun, from whose spicy coast, like a
true Phoenix you were to come; For so at the sight of that Royal Bird
was the memory of _Sesostris_, of _Amasis_ and _Ptolemy_ ever fortunate,
and so was yours to us;

    _----Tum rusticus ergo
    Suspicit observans volucrem; nam creditur annus
    Ille salutaris----_

the happy presages of our glorious Returne, stupendious indeed and almost
indicible: For no sooner did your _Argo_ hoise sail, that the Eagles
themselves fled not swifter, then the report of your approach from ten
thousand mouthes of brasse, echoing from ship to ship, and shore to shore,
with their thundring voices, out done yet with the shouts and acclamations
of your glad people, when our shaken Republique rushed at once into your
princely Armes for safety and _Asylum_, not by the occult power of
Destiny, or blind revolution, but the extraordinary hand of Providence,
whose _pathes are in the great Waters, and whose footsteps are not known:
O novum atque inauditum ad principatum iter_, who that shall write Annals,
or Verses can ever forget that day? not decrepit age, not the sick, not
the tender Sex were kept back from resolving to behold that miraculous
entry of yours; The very little children pointed to you, the striplings
and young men exsulted, the Antient men stood amazed, and those who were
under the empire of a cruel disease, leaped out of their beds, to have the
sight of you, that were the safety of the People, returning with cure and
refreshment: Others protested, they had even now lived long enough, and
were ready to expire with joy, and the transports of their spirits; as
satisfied that this Ball could not present them with an other object
worthy their admiration; others wished now to live more then ever, that
they might still enjoy their desired object; and women forgetting the
pains of childbirth, brought forth with joy, because they gave Citizens to
their Prince, and Souldiers now to their lawful Emperour.

Your Majesty must needs remember, nor is the sound yet out of your sacred
ears, when the houses of this your August Metropolis were covered with the
loud and cheerful spectators, because the earth was too narrow to contain
them; the wayes and the trees were filled with the shouting of your
people, LONG LIVE KING _CHARLES_ THE _II._ _tamque æqualiter ab omnibus ex
adventu tuo lætitia percepta est, quam omnibus venisti_. For when the wise
Arbiter of things began to look down upon us, all things conspir'd to make
us happy; our Deliverance by your Majesty as by another _Moses_, leading
us out of that _Ægyptian_ bondage; or by a nearer resemblance that of the
_Babylonish_ captivity, if not yet farr greater; since God did there only
turne the heart of a Prince to let a nation go: Here, the hearts of a
whole Nation, to invite a banish'd Prince to come, when no other visible
power interpos'd. Let others boast then of their miracles; we can produce
such, as no age, no people under heaven can shew; God moving the hearts of
his most implacable Enemies in a moment as it were, and those who had been
before inhumanely thirsty after your blood, now ready to sacrifice their
own for your safety; _Digna res memoratu! ibat sub ducibus vexillisque
Regiis, hostis aliquando Regius, & signa contra quæ steterat sequebatur_.
But I suffer [HW: surfeit] with too much Plenty, and what eloquence is
able to expresse the triumph of that your never to be forgotten Entry,
unlesse it be the renewing of it this day? For then were we as those who
dream, and can yet hardly be perswaded, that we are truly awake: _Dies
ille æternis seculis monumentisque mandandus_, A day never to be forgotten
in all our Generations, but to be consecrated to posterity, transmitted to
future Ages, and inserted into Monuments more lasting then Brasse. Away
then with these Woodden and temporary Arches, to be taken down by the
People at pleasure; erect Marble ones, lasting as the Pyramids, and
immovable as the mountains themselves, and when they fail, let the memory
of it still remain engraven in our Hearts, Books, Records, _novissimo haud
peritura die_.

And yet not this altogether, because we have received a Prince, but such a
Prince, whose state and fortune in all this blessed change, we so much
admire not, as his mind; For that is truly felicity, not to possesse
great things, but to be thought worthy of them: And indeed Great Sir,
necessity constrains me, and the laws of _Panegyric_, to verifie it in
your Praises, by running over at least those other Appellations, which
both your vertue has given to your Majesty, and your Fortune acquir'd. For
he is really no King who possesses not (like you) a Kingly mind, be his
other advantages what they may: If the Republick belong then to _Cæsar_,
_Cæsar_ belongs much more to the Republick; and of this you have given
proof.

For no sooner were we possess'd of your sacred Majestie, but you suddainly
gave form to our confused _Chaos_: We presently saw when you had taken the
reigns into your sacred hands, and began to sit at Sterne, our deviating
and giddy course grow steady, and the fluctuating Republick at drift ready
to put into a secure Port.

You began your Entry with an act of general Clemency, and to make good the
advice of your Martyr'd Father, and the best Religion, forgave you
bitterest Enemies; and not only barely forgiving, but by an excesse of
charity, doing honour to some, _ut nemo sibi victus te victore videatur_.
This was plainly Godlike: For so rare a thing we find it, that Princes
think themselves oblig'd; or if they think it, that they love it; that
your example will reproach all who went before you: As you promis'd, so
you perform'd it, punctually, and with advantage. Nor indeed do you desire
any thing should be permitted your Majesty, but what is indulg'd your
Vassals, subjecting even your self to those Lawes by which you oblige your
Subjects; For as it is a great felicity to be able to do what one will, so
is it much more glorious, to will only what is just and honourable. All
other Princes before your Majesty spake as much; you only have performed
it; nor is there a Tittle of your engagements, which even your very
enemies diffide of, much lesse your Friends suspect: They enjoy, and these
hope; because those were to be conciliated by present effects, these are
secure by past promises; and none that receives them of your Majesty
reckons from the time they injoy it, but the period of your promise;
because it proceeds (they know) from a Princely and candid mind; and if it
seem long in acquiring, it is not (I perswade my self) because you are
difficult, much less unmindful; but that the benefit may be more
acceptable, and the sense of it more permanent; since too suddain felicity
astonishes, and sometimes renders the Recipient ingrateful, whilst your
favours are not fugitive but certain. It was only for Your Majestie to be
compleatly happie, when you began to be so; and yet your subjects had as
much as they could well support; since you have made it your only
businesse to sublevate the needie, and give them as it were a new Fate,
your piety not more appearing in pardoning your Enemies, and receiving the
Penitent, then your justice in restoring the Oppressed: For how many are
since your returne, return'd to their own Homes, to their Wives, Children,
Offices, and Patrimonies? _Addiditque Dominus omnia quæ fuerant Jobi
duplicia_; some of them with immense advantages; and of this the
languishing _Church of England_ is a most eminent instance; That she,
which was first and most afflicted, should be first and chiefly refreshed.

You have taken away the affluence to the Committees, Sequestrators,
Conventicles, and unjust Slaughter-houses, and converted their zeal to the
Temples, the Courts, and the just Tribunals: Magnanimity is return'd
again to the Nobility, Modesty to the People, Obedience to Subjects,
Charity to Neighbours, Pietie to Children, Fidelity to Servants, and
Reverence to Religion; In summe, You are the Restorer of Your Countrie.

The lawes that were lately quiescent, and even trampled under foot, your
Majesty has revived; and been yet so prudent in reforming, that even those
which your Enemies made upon good deliberation, you permit to stand,
shewing your self rather to have been displeased with the Authours, then
the Things.

As to Discipline (after the sacrifice due for that innocent blood of your
glorious Father) you are not only careful to reject vice your self; but
are severe to discountenance it in others; and that yet so sweetly, as you
seem rather to perswade then compell; and to cure without a corrosive.

The Army is disbanded, and the Navy paid off without Tumult; because you
are trusted without suspicion, and are more secure in the publick love and
affection of your people then in men of Iron, the locks and Bars of
Tyrants Palaces: And truely Sir, there is no protection to innocency,
which is a fort inexpugnable: In vain therefore do Princes confide in any
other; for Armes invite Armes, Terrour, suspition. To this only do you
trust, and the few which you maintain about your person, is rather for
state, then fear. _Quid enim istis opus est, quum firmissimo sis muro
Civici amoris obtectus?_ Here is then the firm Keeper of our Liberties
indeed, whom the Armies love for His own sake, and whom no servile
flattery adores; but a simple, and sincere devotion; and verily such a
Prince as Your Majesty, deserves to have friends, Prompt, steady and
faithful; such as You have, and which Virtue rather then Fortune procures.
Of this I obtest the fidelity of Your own inviolable Party, distinguished
formerly by the invidious name of _Cavalier_, though significant and
glorious; but I provoke the World to produce me an example of parallel
Loyaltie: What Prince under heaven, after so many losses, and all
imaginable calamities, can boast of such a party? The _Grecians_ forsook
their Leaders upon every sleight disaster; the very _Romans_ were not
steady of old, but followed the fortune of the Common Victor. The _German_
and the _French_ will happily stick to their Prince in distresse, as far
as the Plate, the Tapistry, or some such superfluous moveable may abide
the pawn; But where shall we find a Subject that hath persisted like Your
Majesties, to the losse of Libertie, Estate, and life it self, when yet
all seem'd to be determin'd against them; so as even their enemies were at
last vanquish'd with their constancy, and their very Tormentors wearied
with their insuperable Patience; nor can they in all that tract of Time,
hardly brag of having made one signal _Proselyte_ in twenty Years that
this difference continu'd; and that because the obedience of your
Majesties Subjects, is engraffed into their Religion and Institution, as
well as into the adoration of Your Virtues.

I would not therefore that Your Name should be painted upon Banners, or
Carved in stone, _sed Monumentis æternæ laudis_; and Your Majesty did well
foresee, and consult it, when you furnish'd a Subject for our
_Panegyrics_, and our Histories, which should outlast those frail
materials. The Statues of _Cæsar_, _Brutus_ and _Camillus_ were set up
indeed because they chased their enemies from the Walls of a proud Citie;
You have done it from a whole Kingdom; not (as they) by blood and
slaughter, but by your prudence and Counsels: Nor is it lightly to be
passed over, that your Majesty was preserved in that _Royal Oak_, to whom
a Civical Crown should so justly become due.

But I now arrive to the _Lawes_ you have made, and the excellent things
which your Majestie hath done since you came amongst Your people. Truely,
there is hardly an hour to be reckoned wherein your Majesty has not done
some signal benefit. I have already touch'd a few of them, as what
concern'd the most, I would I could say the best; for you have oblig'd
your very Enemies, You have bought them; since never was there, till now,
so prodigious a summe paid, a summe hardly in Nature, to verifie a Word
only; and which the zeal of Your good Subjects (had you taken the
advantage of the fervour which I but now mentioned, at Your wonderful
Reception) might easily have absolv'd You of; had You paid them in kind,
and as they were wont to keep faith with your Majestie. I provoke the
World again to furnish an instance of a like generositie, unlesse he climb
up to heaven for it. How black then must that ingratitude needs appear,
which should after all this, dare to rebell; Or, for the future once
murmur at Your Government? Since it was no necessity that compell'd You,
but an excesse of your good nature, and your charitie.

Your Majestie has abolished the _Court of Wards_; I cannot say we have
freed ourselves in desiring it, if it were possible to hope for so
indulgent a Father as Your Majestie is to Your Countrie, in those who
shall succeed You.

The _Compositions_ You have likewise eased us of, if that could be
esteem'd a burthen, to serve so excellent a Prince, who receives nothing
of his Subjects but what he returnes again in the Noblest and worthiest
Hospitality, that any Potentate in earth can produce; Thus what the Rivers
pay to the Ocean, it returns again in showers to replenish them. But Your
Majestie would dissipate even the very shadows, which give us umbrage; and
rather part with your own just right, then those few of your Subjects
which it concern'd, should think themselves aggreiv'd, though by a mistake
even of their duty.

[SN: _His Majesties Declaration._] But I should first have mention'd your
settlement of the _Church_, and Your bringing back the Ark of God: Your
Majesties wise composure of our Frailties, and tendernesse as well in the
Religious as the Secular; whilst yet You continue fervent to maintain what
is decent, and what is setled by Law. But what language is capable to
expresse this Article? Let those who wait at the Altar, and to which you
have restor'd the daily sacrifice, supply the defect of this period, and
celebrate your piety.

Nor has yet Your zeal to the Church, lessen'd that which is due to the
Common-wealth; witnesse your industry in erecting a _Counsel of Trade_, by
which alone you have sufficiently verified that expression of your
Majesties in your Declaration from _Breda_, That You would propose some
useful things for the publick emolument of the Nation, which should render
it opulent, splendid and flourishing; making good your pretence to the
universall Soveraignty by Your Princely care, as well as by your birth and
undoubted Title.

You have Restor'd, Adorn'd, and Repair'd our Courts of Judicature,
turning the Shambles where your Subjects were lately butcher'd, into a
Tribunal, where they may now expect due Justice; and have furnish'd the
Supreame seat there with a _Chancelour_ of antient candor, rare
experience; just, prudent, learned and faithfull; in summe, one, whose
merits beget universal esteem, and is amongst the greatest indications of
your Majesties skill in persons, as well as in their Talents and
perfections to serve you. Thus you have gratified the long robe, so as now
again,

           _Te propter colimus leges, animosque ferarum
    Exuimus_----And there is hope we may again be civiliz'd.

For you are (we hear) publishing _Sumptuary Lawes_ to represse the
wantonness and excess of Apparel, as you have already testifi'd your
abhorrency of _Duelling_, that infamous and dishonourable gallantry: In
fine, you have establish'd so many excellent constitutions, that you seem
to leave nothing for us to desire, or your Successor to add either in the
_Ethicall_ or _Politicall_.

    ----_Similem quæ pertulit ætas
    Consilio, vel Marte virum?_----

O happy _Greece_ for Eloquence, that hast celebrated the fortune of thy
_Heroes_ trifling Adventures! who shall set forth and immortalize the
glory of our illustrious Prince, and advance Great _CHARLES_ to the skies?
You had Poets indeed that sung the fate of an unfortunate Lady, the theft
of a simple fleece; what wouldst thou have done, had the glorious Actions
of such a King been spread before thee, who has not robbed with Armies,
depopulated Cities, or violated the Rights of Hospitality; but restor'd a
broken Nation, repair'd a ruin'd Church, reform'd, and re-establish'd our
ancient Laws; in summe, who has at once render'd us perfectly happy? What
then have we to do with _Augustus_, or _Titus_, with _Trajan_, _Hadrian_,
_Antoninus_, _Theodosius_ or even _Constantine_ himself? There is not in
any, there is not in all these Subjects more worthy of praise, and to
which your Majesty; O best of Princes, ought at all to render.

We are told _Periculosæ rem aleæ esse, de iis scribere quibus sis
obstrictus_; because it is so difficult to observe a mediocrity, where our
affections are engaged: But your Majesty is as secure from flattery, as
your Virtues are above its reach; and to write thus of ill Princes, were
both a shame and a punishment: For this the _Senate_ condemn'd the History
of _Cremutius_ to the flames; and _Spartianus_ told _Dioclesian_ boldly,
how hard it would be to write their Commentaries, except it were to record
their Impudence, Murthers, Injustice, and the (for most part) fatal
periods of Tyrants; which if any esteem a glory, you envy not, whilst your
Majesty is resolv'd to secure your own by your virtue and your Justice; so
as no age to come shall possibly find an æmulator, or produce an equall.

    ----_Fuerint aliis hæc forte decora,
    Nulla potest Laus esse tibi quæ crimina purget._

But I shall never have done with your obligations of the publick; and the
measure which is assign'd me, would be too narrow but to mention briefly
those your private and interiour perfections which crown your Majesties
Person, and dazle our eyes more then the bright purple which this day
invests you. To give instance in some; you are an excellent Master to your
Domesticks. Their Lives, Conversations and Merits as well as Names, and
Faces, are known to your Majesty as the Companions of _Cæsar_ were: Honour
is safe under your Banner, and the Court so well regulated, that there is
no need of _Censors_ to inspect Mens Manners; _vita principis pro censura
est_. He who knowes that every body eyes, speaks and writes of him, cannot
in prudence, or think, or act things unworthy and abject: You Sir direct
all your objects and motions so, as may recommend you to posterity; and
even burn with desires of immortality, so as Histories may relate the
Truth without fear or adulation.

How happy then those Servants of yours, whose fidelity and Industry is
known to your Majesty, not from the interpretation and reports of others,
but your own experience! So as you Reward as well with Judgment, as
Bounty; and verily that is true Beneficence to place your Recompense as
well equally as freely: Most other Virtues are competent to the rest of
Men; Beneficence only to a Prince, as his most Essential property, and the
noblest ingredient of his _Elogy_. Hence that great Saint, as well as
Courtier and Prelate has directed, _Si quis Principem laudare vellet,
nihil illi adeo decorum adscriberet quam Magnificentiam_; [SN: _S.
Chrysost._] and _Criticks_ observe, that where the wise King _Solomon_
sayes, _Multi colunt personam Principis_, the _Hebrew_ version reads it,
_personam Benefici_, as importing both; and in that of his Who was greater
then _Solomon_, _Qui dominantur eorum Benefici vocantur_, the _Chaldy_
turnes, _Principes vocantur_, as if by a convertible figure, He could not
be a Prince who were not Beneficent; nor he that is truly Beneficent,
unworthy of that Title. I remember 'tis somewhere said of _Saul_ that he
Reign'd but two years; because he was so long it seems good to his people,
and reigned in their hearts; For as the Sun himself should not be the Sun,
if he did not shine; no more should a Prince be worthy of his dignity, if
he unjustly Ecclips'd his influence, or abused his Magnificency. But as we
said, this virtue is added to your Majesties also; who know so well to
adjust its Definition by your constant practice, rendering it (as indeed
it ought) productive of your will for glorious and honest ends only; But I
now proceed with the rest.

There is such a Majesty in your Countenance, such Lenity in your Eyes,
gravity in your speech, as that for your gracefull presence that may be
truly affirm'd of you what was once appli'd to a great Prince resembling
you, _Jam firmitas, Jam proceritas corporis, jam honor Capitis & dignitas
oris, ad hoc ætatis indeflexa maturitas, nonne longe lateque principem
ostentant?_ since even all these assemble in your Majesties personage; Nor
has fortune chang'd you after all your Travels and Adventures abroad; but
brought you back to us not so much as tinged in the percolations through
which you have been forc'd to run, like the Fountain _Arethusa_ through
the River _Alpheus_ without commixture of their waters. None having more
constantly retained his vertue then your Majesty, nor guarded it with more
caution.

And now in all this height of glory, you receive all Men with so much
humility, that the difference of your change seems to be only this; that
you are now beloved of more, and love more, treating every man, as if
every man were your proper care, and as becomes the Father of so great a
Family; Sometimes you are pleased to lay more aside the beams of Majesty,
that you may descend to do mutual offices of Friendship; as considering
that these Virtues were not concredited to you by God, for your self only,
but for others also: In short, you are so perfect a Prince, that those who
come after you, will fear to be compared to you, _Experti quam sit
onerosum succedere bono Principi_; since to possess your Virtues, they
must support your sufferings; nor can every head know how to sustain the
weight of such a Crown as yours, where the thornes have so long perplext
the Lillies and the Roses of it.

I might here mention Your Heroic and masculine Spirit in dangers, and yet
Your foresight of them; Your tenderness to compassionate, Your Constancie
in suffering, Your Modestie in Prosperitie, Equalitie in Adversitie, and
that sweetness of access which attracts both love and veneration from all
that converse with You; but these have already adorn'd your Character by
that excellent Hand who did lately describe it. [SN: _Col. Tuke._]

You are frequent at Councels, Patient in hearing, pertinent in answering,
judicious in Determining, and so skilfull in the several Languages, that
You many times transact by Your self, what others do by Interpreters;
affecting rather expedition in Your affairs, then insignificant State,
which these acquired parts of Your Majesties do yet augment so much the
more.

You are curious of brave and Laudable things; You love shipping,
Buildings, Gardens (having exceeded _Cyrus_ already in Your Plantations)
Piscinas, Statues, Pictures, Intaglias, Music: You have already amass'd
very many rare collections of all kinds, and there is nothing worthy and
great which can escape Your research.

Nor must I here forget the honour You have done our _Society_ at _Greshham
Colledge_ by Your curious enquiries about the _Load-Stone_, and other
particulars which concern _Philosophy_; since it is not to be doubted but
that{8} so Magnanimous a Prince, will still proceed to encourage that
Illustrious Assembly; and which will celebrate and eternize Your memory to
the future Ages, beyond Your Majesties Predecessors, and indeed all the
Monarchs on the Earth, when for You is reserv'd the being Founder of some
thing that may improve practical and Experimental knowledg, beyond all
that has been hitherto attempted, for the Augmentation of Science, and
universal good of Man-kind, and which alone will consummate Your Fame and
render it immortal.

What shall I superadd to all these? That You rise early, that You are
alwaies employ'd, that You love Hunting, Riding, swimming, manly Robust
and Princely Exercises, not so much for delight, as health and relaxation.
_Et vitæ pars nulla perit._

O best Idea of Princes, sit to me yet one moment, that I may add this last
touch to Your fair Table; nor wonder that I should attempt so bold an
enterprise; since he that would take the height of _Olympus_, must stand
below in the plain: Subjects can best describe their Princes Virtues;
Princes best know their Subjects, and therefore most fit to rule them. And
long may You live to rule us great Sir. We wish that all you do, or may
do, be propitious to you, to us, to the public; or in a word, to your
_M_ajesty alone, in which both we and the public are mutually concern'd.
Time was (and too long alas it was!) that what was fortunate to the
Tyrant, was unhappy to your Subjects: now they are common to both and
reciprocal; nor can we more be happy without you, then you without us; and
truly all Princes have known, that they are seldom beloved of God, who are
hated of their People; nor can they be long secure. _Vox Populi, vox Dei
est._ But you have seen the Effects of our Prayers against an Usurper;
hear now, O Heaven our Vowes for a just Prince. Not for peace, not for
Riches, not Honours, or new conquests do we supplicate; but for all these
in one, The Safety of _CHARLES_. You alone snatch'd him out of those cruel
hands, now preserve him from them: Render him fortunate to us, to our
Children, succeeding Generations give him a late Successor, and when You
do it, let it be such a one as himself.

Let your Majestie now proceed in his Triumph, and hear the Acclamations of
his people; what can they more expresse who are ready to pave the very
streets with their bodies, in testimonie of their zeal? behold all about
You, the Gratulating old Fathers, the exulting Youths, the glad mothers;
And why should it not be so? Here's no goods publicated, none restrain'd
or mulcted of their Libertie, none diminish'd of dignitie, none molested,
or exil'd; all are again return'd into{9} their houses, Relations and
Properties, and which is yet more then all, to their antient
innocencie{10} and mutual charitie.

If the _Philosopher_ in the _Ethicks_ enquiring whether the felicity of
the sun, do any whit concern the happinesse of the defunct progenitor,
after much reasoning have determin'd that the honour only which his son
acquires by worthie and great actions, does certainly refresh his Ghost:
What a day of Jubilee, is this then to Your blessed Father! Not the odor
of those flowers did so recreate the dead _Archemorus_ which the _Nymphs_
were yearly wont to strow upon his watry Sepulcher, as this daies
Inauguration of Yours, does even seem to revive the Ashes of that sacred
_Martyr_.

Should some one from the clouds that had looked down on the sad face of
things, when our Temples lay in dust, our Palaces in desolation, and the
Altars demolished; when these Citie Gates were dashed to pieces, Gibbets
and Executions erected in every Street, and all things turned into
universal silence and solitude, behold now the change of this daies
glorious scean; that we see the Churches in repair, the sacred Assemblies
open'd, our Cities re-edified, the Markets full of People, our Palaces
richly furnished, and the Streets proud with the burden of their Triumphal
Arches, and the shouts of a rejoycing multitude: How would he wonder and
stand amaz'd, at the Prodigie, and leap down from his lofty station,
though already so near to heaven, to joyne with us in earth, participate
of our felicitie, and ravish'd with the Ecstasie, cry out aloud now with
Us.

Set open the Temple-Gates, let the Prisoners go free, the Altars smoak
perfumes, bring forth the Pretious things, strow the Waies with Flowers,
let the Fountains run Wine, Crown the Gobblets, bring Chapplets of Palmes
and Lawrells, the Bells ring, the Trumpets sound, the Cannon roar, O happy
Descent, and strange Reverse! I have seen{11} E_nglands_ Restorer, Great
_CHARLES the II._ RETURN'D, REVENG'D, BELOV'D, CROWN'D, RE-ESTABLISH'D.

    _Terrasque Astræa Revisit._

And O that it were now in my power to speak some great thing, worthy this
great day; I should put all the flowers of _Orators_ and Raptures of
_Poets_ into one lofty & high Expression, and yet not Reach what I would
say to Your Majestie: For never since there was a Citie, or Kingdom, did a
Day appear more glorious to _England_, never since it was a Nation, and in
which there either was, or ought to be so universal a Jubilation: Not that
Your Triumphal Charriots do drag the miserable Captives, but are
accompanied by freed Citizens; perfidie is now vanquished, popular fury
chayn'd, crueltie tam'd, luxury restrained, these lie under the spondells
of Your Wheeles, where Empire, Faith, Love, and Justice Ride Triumphant,
and nothing can be added to Your _M_a_j_esties glory but its perpetuitie.
But whence, alas! should I have this confidence, after so many _Elogies_
and _Panegyricks_ of great and Eloquent men, who consecrate the memorie of
this daies happinesse; and (were the subject, like that of all other
things) would have left me nothing more to add, unless he who was
sometimes wont to employ his pen for Your _M_ajestie being absent, should
now be silent that you are present, and inflame me with a kind of new
Enthusiasme: I find myself then compell'd out of a grateful sense of my
dutie for the publick benefit, and if your _M_ajestie forbid not, or
withdraw your influence, who shall hinder, that even my slender voice
should not strive to be heard, in such an universall{12} consort, wherein
everybody has a part, every one a share?

Permit me therefore (O best of Kings) to present, and lay these my vowes
at your sacred feet, to exsult, and to Rejoyce with the Rest of your Loyal
Subjects; not as I desire, but as I am able, and as I would do it to God,
and as he best loves it,

    _Sentiendo copiosius, quam loquendo._

_DIXI._




William Andrews Clark Memorial Library: University of California

THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

_General Editors_

H. RICHARD ARCHER
  William Andrews Clark Memorial Library

R. C. BOYS
  University of Michigan

E. N. HOOKER
  University of California, Los Angeles

JOHN LOFTIS
  University of California, Los Angeles

The society exists to make available inexpensive reprints (usually
facsimile reproductions) of rare seventeenth and eighteenth century works.

The editorial policy of the Society continues unchanged. As in the past,
the editors welcome suggestions concerning publications.

All correspondence concerning subscriptions in the United States and
Canada should be addressed to the William Andrews Clark Memorial Library,
2205 West Adams Blvd., Los Angeles 18, California. Correspondence
concerning editorial matters may be addressed to any of the general
editors. Membership fee continues $2.50 per year. British and European
subscribers should address B. H. Blackwell, Broad Street, Oxford, England.


Publications for the fifth year [1950-1951]

(_At least six items, most of them from the following list, will be
reprinted._)

FRANCES REYNOLDS (?): _An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of
Taste, and of the Origin of Our Ideas of Beauty, &c._ (1785). Introduction
by James L. Clifford.

THOMAS BAKER: _The Fine Lady's Airs_ (1709). Introduction by John
Harrington Smith.

DANIEL DEFOE: _Vindication of the Press_ (1718). Introduction by
Otho Clinton Williams.

JOHN EVELYN: _An Apologie for the Royal Party_ (1659); _A
Panegyric to Charles the Second_ (1661). Introduction by Geoffrey Keynes.

CHARLES MACKLIN: _Man of the World_ (1781). Introduction by
Dougald MacMillan.

_Prefaces to Fiction_. Selected and with an Introduction by Benjamin
Boyce.

THOMAS SPRAT: _Poems._

SIR WILLIAM PETTY: _The Advice of W. P. to Mr. Samuel Hartlib for
the Advancement of some particular Parts of Learning_ (1648).

THOMAS GRAY: _An Elegy Wrote in a Country Church Yard_ (1751).
(Facsimile of first edition and of portions of Gray's manuscripts of the
poem).

       *       *       *       *       *

To The Augustan Reprint Society
_William Andrews Clark Memorial Library
2205 West Adams Boulevard
Los Angeles 18, California_


_Subscriber's Name and Address_:

______________________________________________

______________________________________________

______________________________________________


_As _MEMBERSHIP FEE_ I enclose for the years marked:_

The current year                       $ 2.50 __
The current & the 4th year               5.00 __
The current, 3rd, & 4th year             7.50 __
The current, 2nd, 3rd. & 4th year       10.00 __
The current, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, & 4th year  11.50 __

(_Publications no. 3 & 4 are out of print_)

Make check or money order payable to
THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA.

NOTE: _All income of the Society is devoted to defraying
cost of printing and mailing._




PUBLICATIONS OF THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

First Year (1946-1947)

1. Richard Blackmore's _Essay upon Wit_ (1716), and Addison's _Freeholder_
No. 45 (1716).

2. Samuel Cobb's _Of Poetry_ and _Discourse on Criticism_ (1707).

3. _Letter to A. H. Esq.; concerning the Stage_ (1698), and Richard
Willis' _Occasional Paper No. IX_ (1698). (OUT OF PRINT)

4. _Essay on Wit_ (1748), together with Characters by Flecknoe, and Joseph
Warton's _Adventurer_ Nos. 127 and 133. (OUT OF PRINT)

5. Samuel Wesley's _Epistle to a Friend Concerning Poetry_ (1700) and
_Essay on Heroic Poetry_ (1693).

6. _Representation of the Impiety and Immorality of the Stage_ (1704) and
_Some Thoughts Concerning the Stage_ (1704).


Second Year (1947-1948)

7. John Gay's _The Present State of Wit_ (1711); and a section on Wit from
_The English Theophrastus_ (1702).

8. Rapin's _De Carmine Pastorali_, translated by Creech (1684).

9. T. Hanmer's (?) _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet_ (1736).

10. Corbyn Morris' _Essay towards Fixing the True Standards of Wit, etc._
(1744).

11. Thomas Purney's _Discourse on the Pastoral_ (1717).

12. Essays on the Stage, selected, with an Introduction by Joseph Wood
Krutch.


Third Year (1948-1949)

13. Sir John Falstaff (pseud.), _The Theatre_ (1720).

14. Edward Moore's _The Gamester_ (1753).

15. John Oldmixon's _Reflections on Dr. Swift's Letter to Harley_ (1712);
and Arthur Mainwaring's _The British Academy_ (1712).

16. Nevil Payne's _Fatal Jealousy_ (1673).

17. Nicholas Rowe's _Some Account of the Life of Mr. William Shakespear_
(1709).

18. Aaron Hill's Preface to _The Creation_; and Thomas Brereton's Preface
to _Esther_.


Fourth Year (1949-1950)

19. Susanna Centlivre's _The Busie Body_ (1709).

20. Lewis Theobald's _Preface to The Works of Shakespeare_ (1734).

21. _Critical Remarks on Sir Charles Gradison, Clarissa, and Pamela_
(1754).

22. Samuel Johnson's _The Vanity of Human Wishes_ (1749) and Two _Rambler_
papers (1750).

23. John Dryden's _His Majesties Declaration Defended_ (1681).

24. Pierre Nicole's _An Essay on True and Apparent Beauty in Which from
Settled Principles is Rendered the Grounds for Choosing and Rejecting
Epigrams_, translated by J. V. Cunningham.




{Transcriber's notes:

1. Word unclear in original.

2. Original reads "perfidiousuess"; changed to "perfidiousness".

3. Original reads "single person condemn"; changed to "single person;
condemn".

4. Original reads "extram"; changed to "extream".

5. Word unclear in original.

6. Word unclear in original.

7. Original reads "Hypocrsie"; changed to "Hypocrisie".

8. Original reads "butt hat"; changed to "but that".

9. Original reads "ito their houses"; changed to "into their houses".

10. Original reads "innocenie"; changed to "innocencie".

11. Original reads "I have seens"; changed to "I have seen".

12. Original reads "univresall"; changed to "universall". }





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of An Apologie for the Royal Party
(1659); and A Panegyric to Charles the Second (1661), by John Evelyn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APOLOGIE, THE ROYAL PARTY (1659) ***

***** This file should be named 17833-8.txt or 17833-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/8/3/17833/

Produced by David Starner, Louise Pryor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
