
INSTRUCTIONS:

This is a multi volume index file

The index has links to all volumes.

Follow these instructions if you would like to have your own copy of
this index and all the volumes of SABATINI, on your hard disk. Doing so
will allow this index to be used with all the many links to the volumes
and chapters when you are not connected to the internet:

3. Go to your Download Directory and double-click on the downloaded file
(29431-h.zip), and move the directory 29431-h to this or any other
directory you would like. Then double-click on 29431-h; you will see
several directories: you may rename the directory named FILES to any
name you wish, such as SABATINI. You may move this file to any directory
on your computer.

4. In the newly named directory containing all the eBooks in this set
you will find a file named INDEX.HTM in capital letters, this html file
can only be used here; a shortcut to it may be installed on your desktop
or any directory on your computer. This index file or its shorcut allows
you to open all of the OFF-LINE files, chapters and illustrations in
this set now on your hard disk. The name of the SHORTCUT may of course
be renamed as you wish, for example: SABATINI INDEX.

When using the index or any of the files you may use the BACK button to
return from any link.

5. This archive of Project Gutenberg eBooks in the files directory (see
instruction #3) also includes, in addition to the usual HTML files for
your computer, two sets of mobile viewer files for Kindles, Nooks and
others which use .mobi or .epub formats. There is no index for these as
after you download them to your mobile viewer it will automatially list
the new title names in the usual place. The directories are named:
"EPUB" and "MOBI". Double click on the directory which applies to your
mobile viewer and move all the enclosed files to your device using the
same connection technique you are familiar with when you have downloaded
any commercial eBooks from your computer.
