The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pirates of Shan, by Harold Leland Goodwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pirates of Shan

Author: Harold Leland Goodwin

Release Date: April 19, 2010 [EBook #32059]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIRATES OF SHAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        THE PIRATES OF SHAN

                A RICK BRANT SCIENCE-ADVENTURE STORY

                          BY JOHN BLAINE


GROSSET & DUNLAP PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK, N. Y.
1958

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

_Printed in the United States of America_




[Illustration: _Rick wielded the kris with deadly effect_]




Contents


I THE MISSING SCIENTISTS

II THE HINDU MERCHANT

III BAGOBO COUNTRY

IV THE HEADMAN'S SECRET

V TRAIL OF THE "SAMPAGUITA"

VI THE MAN IN THE RED FEZ

VII NEWS AT ZAMBOANGA

VIII THE "SWIFT ARROW"

IX THE MORO KNIVES

X SOUTH OF SULU

XI THE DANCING PIRATES

XII SEARCH THE WIDE SEAS

XIII THE TWO DATUS

XIV THE HIGH FIRE

XV PLAN OF ATTACK

XVI THE BLACK CLIFF

XVII THE RADIO LINK

XVIII UNDER COVER OF DARKNESS

XIX CHAHDA SWEEPS THE SEA

XX THE PATROL TAKES OVER




List of Illustrations


_Rick wielded the kris with deadly effect_

_The warrior shook Rick's hand and smiled_

_The man's back was tattooed with a strange design_

"_All hands on deck! Pirates!_"

_A sudden jerk would attract the guard's attention_

_Rick braced himself for the shock_




THE PIRATES OF SHAN




CHAPTER I

The Missing Scientists


"We'd better do something," Rick Brant stated grimly, "and we'd better
do it fast." He picked up a stone and threw it far out into the green
waters of the Atlantic, a gesture that did little to relieve his worry
and anxiety.

Don Scott, nicknamed Scotty, said soothingly, "I know how you feel. I
feel the same way. But don't forget that Dad is just as worried as we
are--maybe even more so, because he feels responsible. Besides, I don't
think we have long to wait, not with Colonel Rojas here."

Rick knew that his dark-haired pal was right, but inaction, even under
ordinary circumstances, made him restless, and now that two staff
scientists had mysteriously disappeared, his normal desire to keep
things moving swiftly was augmented by fear for their safety.

The Spindrift Scientific Foundation, with headquarters on famed
Spindrift Island off the New Jersey coast, was regarded by most people
as a typical group of scientists, impersonal and efficient, who
sometimes made important discoveries or got involved in scientific
adventures. But the picture of the Foundation, given mostly through
impersonal scientific publications, was wrong.

The scientific efficiency and purpose of Spindrift could not be denied.
But what the public failed to appreciate was that the staff, headed by
Rick Brant's scientist father, was more like a family than a
corporation. The center of activity was the big Brant house and the
adjoining laboratory on Spindrift Island. The scientists were not only
colleagues, but close personal friends.

As a consequence, when the staff zoologist, Dr. Howard Shannon, and the
staff archaeologist, Dr. Anthony Briotti, failed to turn up on schedule
from an expedition to the Sulu Sea, the entire Foundation became
personally concerned. All work stopped while the staff speculated on
what might have happened, what course of action to take.

Rick Brant and his pal Scotty were particularly upset when the days
passed and Hartson Brant failed to decide on a course of action. Rick
knew, of course, that his father was proceeding logically, obtaining
information by cable and phone from the Philippines, but he resented the
passing days.

"I'm glad Rojas is here," Rick said. "That must mean Dad is making up
his mind. And you know what I hope, don't you?"

"Same as I do. But don't hope too much. Maybe Dad will decide this is a
job for professionals, and not for us."

Hartson Brant had returned only a few minutes ago from a hurried trip to
New York. He had brought with him Colonel Felix Rojas of the Philippines
Constabulary. The tall, slender officer was at present on duty with his
country's United Nations delegation. He was an old friend, dating back
to the adventure of _The Golden Skull_ when Rick, Scotty, Chahda, and
Tony Briotti had gone to the fabulous rice terraces of Ifugao.

The colonel was having a belated lunch with Dr. and Mrs. Brant, and
Rick's father had indicated politely but firmly that the two boys were
not to broach the subject of the missing scientists until the colonel
had finished eating. Dr. Brant had promised to call them for the meeting
which was to take place immediately after lunch. Both boys were so
impatient for the meeting to begin that it seemed to them the others
were taking an unduly long time to consume the meal.

"Rick, Scotty. Come on into the library."

The boys turned swiftly at Hartson Brant's call and hurried from the
waterfront to the big Brant house. As they entered, Hobart Zircon was
just coming down the stairs from his room. The distinguished nuclear
physicist greeted them with a comradely wink. "So you two are attending
the meeting too, eh? I have an idea we may be joining forces again."

Zircon had shared many adventures with the boys. More than once, his
enormous size and legendary strength had gotten them out of a tight
spot. The physicist was considerably over six feet tall and built like a
fighting bull, and he had a booming voice that fitted his physique.

Hartson Brant introduced Zircon to Colonel Rojas, waved the group to
seats, and got down to business. He addressed the Filipino officer.
"First, let me say for all of us that we are indebted to you for leaving
your office on such short notice to give us the benefit of your advice
and counsel."

"It is nothing. If I can be of help, I will be grateful. Perhaps if you
will start at the beginning, it will clarify things."

The scientist nodded assent. "I'll be glad to. As I told you on the way
over, two of our staff members are missing. You know one of them--Dr.
Anthony Briotti. The other is Dr. Howard Shannon, our zoologist. Tony,
of course, is an archaeologist. They departed for the Sulu Sea several
weeks ago on a joint expedition to try to find new evidence for a theory
of migration of the early peoples in the Pacific."

Hobart Zircon added, "We started on this theory some time ago with a
trip to an island in the western Pacific. Dr. Briotti continued that
work during the rice-terrace expedition. I believe you met him then."

"I did," Colonel Rojas agreed. "How is the present expedition connected
with your previous work? The combination of an archaeologist and a
zoologist seems unusual."

"Tony has determined that the origins of the Bajaus, the Sea Gypsies of
Sulu, may be of importance," Hartson Brant explained. "In addition, he
wanted to check some details of Bagobo culture. Dr. Shannon hoped to
contribute some evidence based on the early migration of some animals
from the Asia mainland to the islands."

Colonel Rojas nodded. "I understand. The presence of some animals may
show that a land bridge existed between Sulu and the mainland across
which the early peoples may have migrated."

"Exactly. I'm sure you also know that our staff has been co-operating
with Dr. Remedios Okola of the University of the Philippines. It was
from him we learned that our friends had vanished, when they failed to
keep an important appointment."

"You know their itinerary?"

"Yes. They flew to Manila and spent a few days with Dr. Okola. At that
time he persuaded them to revise their schedule, to return to Manila
long enough to join him on a trip to the rice terraces. They flew to
Zamboanga, chartered a boat of some sort, and sailed to Davao by way of
Cotabato. They were supposed to leave the boat at Davao and fly back to
Manila to take the trip with Okola, after which they would return to
Davao, pick up the boat, and go into the Sulu Sea." The scientist's lips
tightened, then he added, "They never kept the appointment with Okola!"

"What did Okola do about it?"

"He got in touch with the constabulary and asked for a check on their
whereabouts, thinking they might have been delayed. The constabulary at
Davao reported that Shannon and Briotti had reached Davao and hired a
truck to take them to a Bagobo village. The truck driver let them off at
a foot trail to the village. No one has seen them since."

Rojas rubbed his chin thoughtfully. "You have heard from the American
consulate at Manila?"

"Yes, by phone, on the same day I talked with Okola. The consulate has
asked your government for help. However, yesterday I received a cable
stating that a second investigation has uncovered nothing new. It
appears that both our governments have done all they can, but obviously
we cannot stop there. So I have decided to send Dr. Zircon, with Rick
and Scotty, to hunt for our friends."

Rick and Scotty exchanged relieved glances. It was what they had hoped
and expected.

The colonel nodded. "I have not had the pleasure of meeting Dr. Zircon
until now, but I have seen Rick and Scotty in action. They are
resourceful, and they are lucky--two necessary qualities for a
expedition such as this. Do you also plan to use their Hindu friend,
Chahda?"

Rick leaned forward anxiously. He had suggested getting Chahda to help
out several days ago, but his father was at that time waiting for
further word from the American consulate. Chahda, a one-time Bombay
beggar boy, had been a close friend since the Tibet relay expedition. He
was a real wizard at uncovering information.

"Yes," Hartson Brant replied. "I have sent him a cable, through his
organization, but he has not yet replied."

Chahda was now a combination assistant and secretary to the chief Far
East agent for JANIG, the secret government agency charged with the
protection of United States top secrets. The Hindu boy's boss, Carl
Bradley, was an old friend of Hartson Brant. Rick knew that Bradley
would release Chahda at once, if assistance to Spindrift was involved,
not only because of his friendship for the Brants, but because the
island scientists had once helped to solve a case for the Far East
agent. Chahda would be especially helpful in the search for the missing
scientists, because he knew his way around the Philippines and had
friends there. It occurred to Rick that his father had probably wired
Chahda, in care of Bradley, via the Spindrift contact in JANIG--Special
Agent Steve Ames.

Colonel Rojas lighted a Manila cigar and settled back in his chair.
"First of all, let us examine the area in which your friends have
disappeared. Davao is on the island of Mindanao, the largest in the
Philippines. It is peaceful, for the most part, even though we have a
mixture of Moros, Christians, and pagans there."

Rick knew about the Moros, Filipinos of the Moslem faith. They were
known as valiant and deadly fighting men. The pagans were primitive
people, like the Bagobos.

"Davao is a large, fairly modern city. But once outside of the city
itself, the country becomes wild. Some of the Bagobo villages are quite
close to Davao. They are peaceful folk, and quite harmless, but there
are savages in the back country who may not be."

"Perhaps we should take arms," Zircon said.

"I would say so. At least a rifle and a sidearm of some kind."

Scotty spoke up. "I can take my rifle."

"And I can borrow Hartson's forty-five automatic," Zircon added. "That
should be enough."

"True," the colonel agreed. "You can always call on the constabulary for
help. I will give you letters to all commanding officers in the area."

Rick knew that would open many doors, because Rojas was not only a
former commandant of the constabulary, but popular with the entire
force.

"How about clothing, Colonel?" Rick asked.

"I assume you will go by air. That means very little baggage. One
tropical suit and the rest rough clothing would be my suggestion."

Scotty changed the subject. "Sir, have you any idea what might have
happened to our friends?"

The officer shrugged. "No more than you have. Scientists generally are
not rich enough to rob, but they are not so poor that they can be harmed
with impunity. Robbery is always possible, although unlikely, with one
exception. Did they have any weapons with them?"

"Shannon had a hunting bow and arrows," Mr. Brant replied. "He planned
to collect some specimens. Briotti had no weapon at all."

"Then that eliminates the only robbery possibility I can think of. Had
they been well armed, Moros might have attacked to get their weapons.
The Moro loves weapons of all kinds, and may even kill to get them--a
point you might remember."

Rick shook his head. "It's hard to imagine why anyone would want to harm
them--if anyone did. I think we'd better get to Mindanao as soon as
possible. When do we leave, Dad?"

"Tomorrow night, son. I made reservations for you while I was in New
York this morning."

"Are we going to take special equipment?" Scotty asked.

Rick had been thinking about that very point. "I'm planning to take the
Megabuck network. It will be useful if we have to separate."

The little network of three miniature radio units, transmitters, and
receivers combined, had been of invaluable help in rounding up a group
of foreign agents bent on stealing the plans for a United States
intercontinental ballistic missile.

The unusual name, Megabuck, had grown out of a joke Rick had conceived
about a "million bucks" television quiz program. Two of the sets were
pocket size, and used hearing-aid-type earphones. The third had been
made in the form of an ornamental hair band for Rick's sister Barby to
wear. The tiny microphone worked by sound induction through the bones of
the head. The earphone was incorporated into one end of the band.

Zircon and Scotty agreed that the radio units might come in handy, and
the physicist added, "I have a pocket-size, battery-operated wire
recorder I use for making notes. I think I'll take that. It may be
helpful for recording conversations for later translation."

"A good idea," the colonel approved. "The local dialect is called
Chebucano. Of course many people speak some English. Have you an atlas?
I think it might be useful if we went over a map of Mindanao and the
Sulu Sea area."

The map study was very helpful. The three absorbed Colonel Rojas' fund
of information about the area. It was a part of the world none of them
had ever seen, located only a few degrees above the Equator in the deep
tropics. To the west of Mindanao was the Sulu Sea, with the Celebes Sea
to the south. The widely scattered centers of civilization had famous,
imagination-stirring names, like Jolo, Tawi Tawi, Cotabato, and
Zamboanga.

Later, the Filipino officer dictated letters of introduction to Rick's
sister Barby, a pretty blond girl a year younger than her brother. Barby
took the dictation directly on the typewriter. Once the letters were
signed and turned over to Dr. Zircon, Hartson Brant escorted the colonel
to the mainland, where arrangements had been made for a local taxi
service to drive him back to New York. Rojas' parting statement was
"This affair worries me. I shall be most interested in developments, and
you may hear from me sooner than you think."

Later, Scotty and Rick gathered in the latter's room and talked while
loading the radio units with fresh batteries.

"Wonder how long it will take to hear from Chahda?" Rick asked.

"Depends on where he is and how fast Steve Ames can get a message to
him. He'll join us if he can. You can bet on it."

"I hope so," Rick said thoughtfully. "We'll be in Manila in a couple of
days, and we'll need him. We've got a job ahead of us, because Tony and
Shannon aren't lost. You can be sure of that. They're not the kind to
get lost. And if they had been in an accident of some kind we'd have
heard."

"Meaning what?"

Rick's eyes met Scotty's. "That leaves only one logical answer, doesn't
it? They've either been killed or captured!"




CHAPTER II

The Hindu Merchant


Thirty-six hours later, after a grueling transcontinental--trans-Pacific
flight with only the briefest of stops to change planes, Rick, Scotty,
and Zircon were in Manila. Their stay in Manila only three hours old,
they had already visited the American consulate and found that no new
information on the missing scientists had been received; they had
arranged a luncheon date with Dr. Okola, and had reserved space on
Philippine Airlines to Davao on the following morning.

Rick paced the floor, sipping a glass of fresh limeade, made with
_calamansi_, the tiny, pungent local limes. His time for the past three
days had been spent alternately dozing and thinking about the problem of
the missing scientists. The more he wondered about their strange
disappearance, the more worried he became.

"There's simply no reason for it," he said aloud.

Scotty looked up from the chair in which he was reading the Manila
_Times_. The husky ex-Marine didn't have to be told what his pal was
thinking. "No reason we can see," he agreed. "But there has to be a
reason."

Hobart Zircon spoke from the desk where he was writing a note to Hartson
Brant. "You might remember, Rick, that we've been on other expeditions
where the reason for certain events was just as puzzling."

Rick knew the kind of events the physicist meant. Only a few dozen yards
from this very room, in the ancient walled city across the street, he
and Scotty had been under rifle fire for a reason they couldn't have
guessed at the time.

"Listen to this," Scotty said suddenly. He read from the newspaper.
"'The American consulate reported today that three members of the
Spindrift Foundation staff have arrived in Manila to begin a search for
the American scientists reported missing a short time ago. The
scientists disappeared north of Davao.' End of item."

"That's short and to the point," Rick commented a little bitterly. "They
certainly don't make much fuss over two missing Americans, do they?"

"And it's on page seventeen," Scotty added. He folded the paper back to
the front page. "Look at this headline."

Across the top of the front page was emblazoned: WHERE IS ELPIDIO
TORRES?

"Who's he?" Rick asked.

"A Filipino kid. He ran away, got lost, or got kidnaped. No one knows
which. His father is a big sugar operator and politician. The kid has
been gone for weeks, but the paper is still playing it up at the top of
page one."

Rick snorted. "Headlines for one Filipino boy and page seventeen for two
American scientists. Some contrast!"

Hobart Zircon fixed a stamp to his letter and walked over to the boys.
"You're not thinking straight, Rick. Suppose two Filipino scientists
were lost in the Rocky Mountains, and the son of a leading American
citizen was missing. How would our own papers play it?"

Rick had to grin. "Emphasis on the local boy, I suppose. You're right,
Professor. I'm just upset. I'd hoped for more from the consul this
morning."

The vice-consul in charge of the case had nothing to add to what they
already knew, and had slim hope of obtaining more information. The
American ambassador had received assurances from the Philippines
government that all possible aid would be given to the Spindrift search
party, and that the constabulary would not give up the hunt. No more
could be done. The American consulate had no resources with which to
conduct a search.

"Come on," Zircon said. "It's time for lunch. Dr. Okola will be arriving
in a few minutes."

"All right. But I wish we could really get started on our search, or
find someone who could help us. Even Chahda hasn't shown up. We haven't
even had a reply to Dad's message."

As they went down to the dining room Scotty pointed out that Chahda
might be very hard to reach. "For all we know, he could be in the
interior of Malaya, or some unlikely place. He would come if he could,
Rick."

Rick knew Scotty was right. Chahda had proved his loyalty and friendship
more than once. Just the same, he had hoped Chahda would come. The Hindu
boy with his "Worrold Alm-in-ack" education, as he called it, could be a
great help. Chahda had not only memorized the entire _World Almanac_,
but he seemed to have a sixth sense about people and places that was
always a source of amazement to Rick and Scotty.

Lunch with Dr. Okola was pleasant, even though it did nothing to advance
the search. Rick and Scotty reminisced about _The Golden Skull_
expedition with the Filipino archaeologist and enjoyed the hour. They
parted with Dr. Okola's assurances that he was ready to help in any way
he could.

As Rick unlocked the door of their room after lunch, he said, "I guess
it's up to us to..." He stopped with a yell of delight as the door
swung open. Seated by the window, waiting for them, was a slim,
brown-skinned boy in a turban. Chahda!

The Hindu boy pounded them in glee, then shook hands with Zircon. "It is
good for old friends to meet," Chahda declared, "even in such unhappying
soaking-stances."

"Circumstances," Rick corrected automatically. "Why didn't you wire? We
thought JANIG hadn't been able to get our message to you."

"I was in Singapore with my boss, Carl Bradley," Chahda explained. "When
your message comes, he says go now, Chahda. By the time a message back
catches them, so will you. You know, he right? I get here before you,
already two days now."

"Two days!" Scotty exclaimed. "What have you been doing?"

Chahda bowed. "Scotty, please to be speckfull. You now speak to Raman
Sunda, salesman of cloths."

"I'll show proper speck," Scotty said with a grin. "Do you mean
clothes?"

"Not clothes. Cloths. Tax-tills."

"Textiles," Zircon boomed. "Chahda, what on earth does a Hindu textile
salesman have to do with finding Briotti and Shannon?"

"Plenty do with, Professor. In this country is plenty Hindus like me.
Many sell tax-tills. So I travel, and listen. Yes?"

Rick still didn't get it. "But why, Chahda?"

"We face fact you like so much, Rick. Okay? This is country of
brown-skinned people, like me. People talk to me when they not talk to
you. So I go alone to Davao, on island of Mindanao. Is big city, says in
'Alm-in-ack.' Has 111,263 peoples. Some maybe know something, so my
friends here, they send me to friend in Davao. He helps me meet people
who can maybe help some more. Okay?"

"I should have known," Rick said with admiration. "Leave it to you to
dig up an angle."

Chahda winked. "Among Hindus is always ideas. Now, I go Davao tonight.
You coming too? Okay. You stay at Apo View Hotel. Is very good. I stay
there, too. We not knowing each other for little while, I think. That is
why I come into your room with special key my boss gives me to open many
doors. Better I work alone for now."

Scotty asked, "How much do you know about our friends' disappearance,
Chahda?"

The Hindu boy launched into a concise and rapid summary. Rick wasn't
surprised to find that Chahda knew everything they had found out.

"You never fail to amaze me," Zircon boomed.

Rick went to his suitcase and drew out the unit of the Megabuck network
he had made for Barby. He explained its operation to Chahda, who
promptly slid it under his turban where no one could see it.

"Sahib Brant plenty smart to make this," Chahda intoned. "Poor native
boy salutes mighty scientist!" He ducked Rick's return swing.

Dr. Zircon had gone to his own suitcase. He returned with his
pocket-size wire recorder and handed it to Chahda. "I brought this to
record conversations in other languages. I think you might stimulate
more interesting talk than we could, Chahda. It will record for an hour
on a single spool."

Chahda took the gadget and checked its operation. Rick was amused to see
that the "poor native boy" figured it out in something less than a
minute, and put it casually in his coat pocket.

"We meet in Davao," Chahda said. He shook hands all around, then paused
at the door. "Please, you good friends. I see you worry plenty. We find
Tony and Dr. Shannon. You see." He opened the door and was gone.

Rick breathed a sigh of relief. "I feel better," he stated. "Just seeing
him again makes me feel good."

"I agree," Zircon said, "and so does Scotty. Now, we will do a little
sight-seeing. I haven't been in downtown Manila for twenty years. We'll
only worry and fret if we stay in this hotel room, so let's go."

The three taxied through the old walled city, then across the Pasig
River and into Manila proper. They inspected the Escolta, principal
street in the shopping area, then headed for Quiapo Square to see the
great cathedral and the shops. Traffic was heavy, so they paid the taxi
driver and got out and walked.

As they crossed a pedestrian overpass by the cathedral, Scotty said
quietly, "In case you were feeling neglected, you can stop. We're being
tailed." Rick and Zircon were too experienced to pause or show interest.
Scotty added, "There's quite a mob on the sidewalk once we get down from
this bridge. Push right into it. I'll drop out and intercept him. If
we're being tailed, we want to know why."

The plan was executed smoothly. Rick was never sure when Scotty melted
into a convenient doorway. After a moment he stopped and looked around.
He was in time to see Scotty step from the doorway and confront a small,
poorly dressed man who wore a red fez.

Rick and Zircon were at Scotty's side in an instant.

The man in the red fez reached for a pocket, and Rick tensed to swing if
necessary. But the man only drew out a cardboard pillbox. "Plenty
bargain for Americans," he announced. "Me Moro from Sulu. My cousin best
pearl diver in Jolo. He get real pearl, I sell. You look."

He opened the pillbox. Rick saw a half dozen pearls of assorted sizes.

"We're not interested," Zircon said flatly. "Sorry. Come on, boys."

They walked away, leaving the Moro staring after them.

Zircon chuckled. "A common thing, as I recall it. I also seem to
remember that most of the pearl-selling Moros in Manila are not genuine.
They're Visayans from Cebu trying to sell phony pearls to tourists."

"But he was trailing us," Scotty insisted.

"I don't doubt it in the least," Zircon replied. "He was probably sizing
us up to see if we're tourists or local Americans. Is he trailing us
now?"

Scotty took advantage of a plate-glass window to survey the street
behind them. "Not that I can see," he admitted.

"All right. Let's not be jumpy, boys. Of course we want to know if, or
why, anyone is shadowing us, but I think we have the answer in this
case. Let's let it go at that."




CHAPTER III

Bagobo Country


By ten o'clock on the following morning Rick and his friends were
jouncing along a twisting, bumpy road into the foothills of Mindanao.
They had risen with the dawn and taken Philippines Airlines, PAL for
short, to Davao. On arrival they had checked in at the Apo View Hotel
and had lost no time in finding local constabulary headquarters.

Major Paulo Lacson, in charge of the detachment, had instantly ordered a
pair of command cars. Before the Spindrifters quite realized it, they
were whisked out of town, en route to the point where Briotti and
Shannon had vanished. Colonel Rojas' letter of introduction had really
worked magic.

Rick stared out at the tropical landscape, and toward the peak of Mount
Apo, an active volcano over nine thousand feet high, but he didn't
really notice details. In a short while they would be at what he
considered the real start of their search.

The major drove the lead car, with Zircon in front beside him. Rick and
Scotty occupied the rear seat. In the second car were four armed,
enlisted men. As the small convoy roared toward the town of Calinan,
Major Lacson told them all he knew of the case. It was the same
information the three had already received, naturally enough, since
their information had been based on the officer's reports.

Rick shook his head worriedly. If Lacson, obviously an intelligent and
efficient officer, could find out no more, how could three strangers?

The command car whisked by an abacá plantation, with mile after mile of
lush green bananalike abacá plants extending into the foothills.

"Look." Scotty pointed at drying racks on which Manila hemp fiber,
product of the abacá, was drying. The fiber was a honey blond shade.

"It's just the color of Barby's hair," Rick exclaimed.

Major Lacson explained, "Abacá is graded by color. White is best, but
that shade means it is very good. It will bring a good price." Then, as
the command car topped a rise, the major pointed ahead. "There is
Calinan."

The town was a small one, with stores and houses on both sides of a
single main street. The place had a sleepy air.

At the edge of town Lacson drew up in front of a house that flew the
flag of the republic. A sergeant ran out, came stiffly to attention, and
saluted. After a brief command from the major, the sergeant ran to climb
into the second car.

"Juan speaks a little Bagobo," Lacson explained. "He can translate for
us."

The two cars moved through the town, past a group of colorfully arrayed
people with flat turbans. "There are some Bagobos now," Lacson said.
"They come to town to shop."

Rick looked with interest. In the few seconds before the car sped out of
sight he saw that the primitives were light of skin, had pierced ears
from which dangled loops, and that the men wore trousers formed of a
single piece of cloth put on like a skirt, then pulled between the legs
and fastened to an ornate belt. Their clothes were brightly colored.

As Calinan dropped behind, the country turned to tropical forest, with
tall lauan and tanguile trees, the source of so-called Philippine
mahogany. Once Rick saw coffee bushes growing under the trees.

Then, only a short distance from Calinan, the paved road came to an
abrupt end and narrowed to little more than a dirt trail. The command
car bucked over hummocks of cogon grass while the boys held on to keep
from being tossed out. Finally, in a small clearing, the road petered
out entirely.

This was the glade, Lacson explained, in which the truck driver had left
Briotti and Shannon. No one had seen them since.

Towering trees cut off the sun and the air was heavy and damp with the
smell of tropic growth. Mosquitoes whined.

Lacson handed around a small bottle of insect repellent. "Rub in well,"
he directed. "You can leave your coats in the car. It will be a warm
hike."

Rick shed his coat gladly. They had worn their tropical suits, and
Lacson had rushed them off so fast there had been no chance to change.

The major gave orders in Chebucano. Two troopers saluted and fell back.
They would stay with the cars. Juan, the trooper from Calinan, took the
lead as the rest started up the trail that led into the jungle from the
clearing.

"Juan knows the trail," Lacson said. "Also, he is good at spotting
snakes and animals."

Rick fell into line behind Zircon and Lacson. Scotty walked at his side
while the two enlisted men brought up the rear.

It was an eerie hike, through growth so thick one couldn't see more than
five paces on either side of the trail. Overhead the foliage met, and
the group walked through a kind of steaming green tunnel. The sun never
penetrated to the jungle floor, where pale plants grew in profusion.

There was life in the trees overhead, heard but unseen. Once Rick
recognized the howl of monkeys. Again, by the side of the trail, there
was a sudden chittering and a tiny furry form made a fantastic leap to
the safety of a rattan vine. Rick caught a glimpse of a monkeylike face
and huge eyes.

"A tarsier," Zircon remarked. "Shannon had hoped to collect one."

Rick wondered whether Shannon and Briotti had hiked up this trail. The
headman of the Bagobo village had told Lacson that the Americans had not
been seen by his people. Might they have vanished on this trail?

He wiped his face and neck with a sodden handkerchief and plodded ahead
through the green steam bath. Insects formed a cloud around his head,
flew into his eyes and even into his mouth. He bore it stoically. It was
as bad for the others.

Anyone who walked off the beaten trails would be helplessly lost without
a compass or an experienced guide. A man could wander in the dense
growth until death in some unpleasant form claimed him. One couldn't
even see a trail from more than a few feet away.

Half an hour later, Rick saw that the growth was giving way to a
different kind of jungle forest, as the trail sloped upward. In a short
time they entered a more normal forest of tall, white lauans over a
hundred feet high, with strange roots like flying buttresses.

Soon the forest gave way to open plain, sparsely dotted with papaya
trees and a lone mango. Lacson called that they were almost at their
destination. Rick wiped his face and was grateful. His clothes hung on
him as though he had been caught in a torrential rain. In spite of the
insect repellent, he had been chewed by assorted bugs.

He forgot his discomfort at the sight of the village. Apparently
civilization had reached the Bagobos. The huts were of sawed lumber and
tin roofing material. He saw one roof made from an American gasoline
sign.

In contrast with the drab surroundings, the people were bright spots of
color. They eyed the group with frank curiosity, then followed as Juan
led the way to the headman's hut.

The headman met them with dignified courtesy. Rick saw that the man was
nearly six feet tall, with a lean, hawklike face, the skin stretched
tightly over high cheekbones. He looked like an American Indian, but his
skin was the color of a white man who has spent his life outdoors in the
tropics. The Bagobos clearly were of a different race than the
Filipinos.

"That's quite a man," Scotty whispered.

Rick nodded. He, too, was impressed by the headman, except for one
thing. Although the Bagobo talked freely, through Juan, his eyes never
once met those of any of the party. He looked everywhere but at the
visitors.

It was out of character, Rick thought. This man, who obviously had a
kind of fierce, barbaric pride, should look any man squarely in the eye.

The talk went smoothly, and Rick realized the headman had been through
all this before, probably more than once, in interviews with the
constabulary. To each question the Bagobo chieftain answered that he had
seen no Americans, nor had his people. Had they come to the village, he
would know it.

"We'll get nothing here," Zircon finally said to the major. "Frankly, I
expected nothing. If there was information to be gained from this man,
you could have gotten it."

Lacson shrugged. "True, perhaps. But I thought you would want to check
for yourself."

Rick only half listened. He noticed a Bagobo standing nearby, watching
intently, and on impulse walked over to him and held out his hand. The
warrior took it instantly and smiled, his brown eyes on Rick's.

[Illustration: _The warrior shook Rick's hand and smiled_]

Rick returned the smile and walked back to his friends, forehead
wrinkled in thought. That had been a straightforward reaction; the
Bagobo had met his eyes squarely and openly.

On the way back to Davao, Rick pondered the meaning of the headman's
failure to look at any of them. But not until they were cleaning up at
the hotel did he decide to put his thoughts into words.

"The headman lied," Rick stated. "I can't figure it any other way. It's
easy to see that the Bagobos are a proud race. They're any man's equal,
and they know it. The headman should be the proudest of all, but
instead, he was shifty. He wouldn't look at any of us."

"That's right," Scotty acknowledged. "He kept his eyes everywhere but on
us."

Rick nodded. "What's more, he's not a shifty type. He looks like a
fierce old eagle who'd stare down a charging elephant. But he couldn't
look at us because he was lying, and he was ashamed of it."

"You may have something," Zircon agreed after a moment of thought. "I
wasn't that observant, but now that you mention it, I believe the
headman kept his eyes on the ground most of the time. I agree it
certainly seemed out of character."

"If he was lying, what can we do about it?" Scotty asked.

Rick wasn't sure, but he had an idea of how to start. Earlier,
immediately on arrival, he had tried to contact Chahda without success.
Now he got a Megabuck unit, put the earplug into place, and tried again.

"Chahda, this is Rick. Are you on?"

The Hindu boy answered at once, and the signal was loud. He probably was
in the hotel. "Waiting, Rick. Where you been?"

Rick quickly sketched the day's activities, and Chahda replied that he
had spent time with his Indian contacts but had discovered nothing new.

"Okay, Rick," Chahda concluded. "I try to find out why headman lies.
Tomorrow I go to Bagobo village to sell tax-tills. Be back noon, meet
you hotel."

"I hope you find out more than we did," Rick said.

Chahda urged, "Please not to worry. This good day's work. One man who
lies maybe has keys to many doors!"




CHAPTER IV

The Headman's Secret


On the following morning Major Paulo Lacson joined the Spindrifters for
breakfast at the hotel. The young officer answered questions about the
region for an hour, but Rick refrained from bringing up the subject of
the headman until breakfast was over. But that was deferred when Scotty
asked a startling question.

"Major, what ever happened to the boat our friends came in?"

Lacson's eyebrows went up. "Boat? What boat?"

"You mean you didn't know they came by boat?" Zircon bellowed
incredulously.

The major shook his head. "This is the first I have heard of a boat. I
assumed they came by air. The instructions I got from Manila were simply
to find two missing Americans, with their names and descriptions. Since
most Americans stay at this hotel I inquired and found they had checked
out. That established their presence in Davao. It didn't occur to me to
be interested in where they had come from, although I knew from my
instructions that it was Zamboanga. Later, I checked the airline to see
if they had left by air, but there was no record."

It was incredible, but there it was. Rick knew it was the kind of slip
that often happens when the background given with instructions is not
complete.

"I will get on this right away," Lacson said. "You have a description of
the boat?"

"I'm afraid not. It was chartered in Zamboanga. Can you get a
description from there?"

"Of course. It's strange the detail of the boat never came to light.
Why, I even had a full description of their Moro guide."

"Guide?" The three said it simultaneously. It was their turn to be
astonished. No one had mentioned a third person in the party.

"You didn't know?" Lacson clapped a hand to his forehead in a gesture of
chagrin. "The lack of communications is ridiculous! Yes, they had a
guide. Apparently they picked him up in Zamboanga. A young Moro, no
outstanding features, who gave his name as Azid Hajullah. We have not
been able to find out any more about him."

Lacson rose, to get a message off about the boat, but Rick stopped him
and quickly outlined his conclusion about the headman, and Chahda's trip
to the Bagobo village.

The major scratched his cheek thoughtfully. "It is just possible you are
right," he said at last. "I myself noted that the old man was not at
ease, but I attributed it to the presence of strange Americans, plus my
own official status. Many primitive peoples are shy in the presence of
authority. However, I agree the headman may have overdone it somewhat.
We will see. I will phone you when I have news of the boat, and perhaps
you will let me know when you hear from this Indian friend of yours."

The morning dragged on after Lacson's departure. The three walked the
streets of Davao and found it to be quite a modern city with two
newspapers, a radio station, and some good stores. Both Rick and Scotty
had the feeling that they were being watched, but the most careful
observation failed to uncover a tail.

Nevertheless, the boys were certain their movements were known to
someone. If only they could discover the invisible watcher, Rick
thought, and squeeze some information out of him....

The tropical sun grew hot as the day progressed, and the three returned
to the hotel and sat in the small dining room over cold limeades and
chilled mango. Rick had kept the Megabuck earphone in place all morning,
and as he started to order another mango, Chahda's voice sounded in his
ear. "Rick, you there?"

"Here," he replied swiftly. "Go ahead."

"Got recording. I think you plenty on ball, Rick. Headman lied like
champ. Meet you hotel room right away. I just driving up. What number
room?"

Rick told the Hindu boy and signed off. He turned to the others. "Let's
go. Chahda's got something!"

They hurried to their room, and Zircon at once placed a call to Lacson.
The constabulary office replied that the major was en route to the hotel
and should be there in a few minutes.

Chahda burst into their room. The Hindu boy was grinning from ear to
ear. He took the tiny recorder from his pocket and handed it to Zircon.
"Plenty hot, you bet. Can I have drink, please?"

Scotty picked up the telephone and ordered him a double limeade with
plenty of ice.

"Much thanks, Scotty. Well, this morning at dawn we merchants go to
Bagobo village. Sell plenty cloths, too. You know some Bagobos speak a
little English? Not much, but enough. While I sell, I start asking
questions, but I get no answer. Then, boy my age starts buying cloth for
new turban. We alone, so I try bribe. I say, 'Tell me about missing
Americans and I give cloth for free.' And you know, he starts!"

"Go on, confound it!" Zircon bellowed. "Don't keep us in suspense like
this."

"Okay, Professor. I talk fast. This boy gets no chance to say something,
because headman busts in and he shoots words at boy like machine gun.
Boy no more will talk to me, but I give him cloth, anyway. Because all
the time I have wire machine going!"

"Wonderful!" Rick exclaimed. "Now, if we can only get it translated!"

Scotty opened the door at a knock and admitted Major Lacson. Zircon
introduced Chahda and explained quickly what had happened. He showed the
officer the wire recorder.

"Good!" Lacson picked up the telephone and made a call. After a brief
exchange in the local dialect he hung up. "We will take it to Davao
University. Dr. Gonzalez, the professor of languages, will translate it.
He speaks Bagobo expertly. Come. My car is outside."

Chahda hung back. "You go. Better I stay under cover while longer. You
call me on radio when you find something."

Rick agreed, then followed the others. They piled into Lacson's command
car and headed for the university.

"I have some news myself," Lacson reported. "Your friends came in a
sloop called the _Sampaguita_, which is a local flower. They tied up at
a private dock on the waterfront."

"Where is the boat now?" Scotty asked.

Lacson shrugged. "Who knows? No one saw it leave, but it was there the
night your friends disappeared, and gone the following morning."

Rick pondered that bit of information while Lacson and Zircon worked
with Dr. Gonzalez, a short, bald Filipino, on the translation of the
wire recording. Certainly Briotti and Shannon wouldn't have walked back
from the Bagobo village and taken the boat themselves. And if they had
walked to Calinan and obtained a car, Lacson would have found out about
it. There weren't so many people in the area that the rental, or
borrowing of a car, by two Americans couldn't be discovered easily. Had
they hitched a ride Lacson would surely have found that out, too. Few
cars traveled the road to Calinan.

Rick took Lacson aside and questioned him while Zircon played the wire
over and over again for the Filipino language expert. The major
confirmed that he had checked, and was satisfied that the scientists had
not obtained a ride back from Calinan from any of the local people.
There were no cars to rent, either.

Rick dropped the subject abruptly as Zircon and Gonzalez finished making
notes and switched off the recorder.

"Dr. Gonzalez has it," Zircon said with quiet triumph. "The language is
difficult, and the headman was far from the microphone, but the sense of
what is on the tape is clear."

The boys and Lacson listened closely as the language professor read.

"'Say nothing, young fool! It is forbidden to speak of the white men.
One word that they were here and the wrath of'--I don't know one word
here--'will fall on the whole village. Do you want to die? Do you want
us all to die? I forbid you to speak on pain of death!'"

"They _were_ there!" Scotty exclaimed. "Now maybe we can find out what
happened."

"At once," Major Lacson added grimly. "Doctor, what does the missing
word sound like?"

The Filipino professor shook his head. "It is a word I've never heard,
Major. It doesn't sound like a Bagobo word at all. It's 'shoon' or
'shawn.' Something like that. It's not clear."

"Will you come with us to translate, Doctor? Juan speaks enough Bagobo
to get by, but I'd rather have you for this trip. It may be difficult."

"I'll be glad to. May I have a few moments to change clothing?"

"Of course. I'll take these gentlemen to the hotel and they can change,
too. We'll pick you up."

Rick took advantage of the few moments in their hotel room to call
Chahda. The Hindu boy answered at once.

"The recording had the answer," Rick told him. "That was a good piece of
work, Chahda. We're leaving for the village at once."

"Good. Something I can do?"

"Not right now. I'll call when we get back."

Rick changed swiftly into khaki trail clothes. Their tropical suit
trousers had been cleaned overnight and he didn't want to ruin his
again.

Outside, Lacson was waiting. Two other command cars had joined him, each
one carrying six armed troopers. The three jumped in with the major and
went past the university to pick up Dr. Gonzalez.

The caravan broke all speed records getting to Calinan. Juan, the local
trooper, got into the last car in line and they roared off to the road's
end. This time the Spindrifters were dressed for the hike, and were well
sprayed with protection against insects. Each had a hat, and a head net.

The group traveled at good speed. Then, as they emerged from the jungle
trail into the clearing that led to the village, a squad of four
troopers, under Juan, broke off from the party and started away at a
dogtrot to make a wide circle and approach the village from the opposite
side.

The rest walked straight ahead, at a slow pace that would give Juan's
squad time to move into position. Rick's party reached the first house
in the village and Major Lacson held up his hand. From the far side of
the village came Juan's whistle blast.

The major's hand dropped. Troopers with rifles charged into the Bagobo
village, scattering among the houses. Lacson drew his pistol and marched
straight to the headman's house.

The headman walked to meet them, and his face stiffened as he saw the
pistol. He spoke rapidly.

Gonzalez translated. "He wants to know why you come with a weapon
pointed at him, and why your men raid his houses."

"Tell him we come as enemies because he lied. The Americans were here.
My men search for evidence."

The Filipino professor translated, and the headman made an expressive
gesture with his hands. He sat down on a seat made of a split tanguile
log and stared straight ahead, obviously intending to maintain a stony
silence.

A trooper ran up, waving a tubular object which he handed to the major.
Rick saw that it was a high-powered telescope, like one Shannon had
owned. His pulse quickened as Scotty removed the protective lens caps
and examined the object.

"Shannon's," Scotty stated. "His initials are stamped on the side, and
on the front lens cap."

The headman seemed to wilt.

Another trooper ran up, and he carried a leather quiver that Rick
recognized instantly. It also was Shannon's. He knew it well, from their
field archery games. In the quiver was the bow, a takedown model, and
three dozen arrows.

"Major, what are we going to do?"

For reply, the officer planted himself in front of the headman, his
voice harsh. "Tell him, Professor Gonzalez, that we have evidence
enough. Unless he has a good explanation, we must believe that his
village murdered the Americans. For this, some of his people may pay
with their lives."

Dr. Gonzalez translated into Bagobo. For long minutes the headman sat
quietly, then he rose to his full height and looked the officer in the
eye.

"I am caught between a knife and a spear," Dr. Gonzalez translated.
"There is death either way. It is true, the Americans came. We made them
welcome. For one evening they stayed. We gave them and their Moro a
house to sleep in. Then, after it was dark and we slept, men came. The
Americans and the Moro fought, but the men tied them up and carried them
away. Then the men said that if one person in my village spoke of this,
all would die. The two things we found were not taken because they were
in a corner of the hut and were not seen. All else was removed."

"Ask him who the men were and why he didn't fight for the Americans,"
Lacson directed.

The Filipino language expert posed the question, then translated the
reply. "He does not know the men, or their names. He did not fight
because it was useless. His people would have died and the Americans
would not have been saved."

"Ask him how he knows this."

The Bagobo's reply was terse. "He knows," Gonzalez said. "He will say no
more."

Lacson made a sound of disgust. "He means it, too. Look at him."

Rick saw what Lacson meant. The stern face and glittering eyes indicated
clearly that the headman would die before he said more about the
attackers.

"Does he know where the Americans were taken?" Zircon asked.

"He does not know. The men took them down the trail. Of course some
Bagobos followed. But at the road the men put the Americans and their
guide into a car and drove away. Apparently there were two or three
cars. The Bagobos could not follow."

"Then Shannon, Briotti, and their guide were probably on the boat when
it left Davao," Rick said thoughtfully. "But where did the boat go?"

Major Lacson answered. "We don't know. But it is possible we may find
out. I've sent out an all-points bulletin asking for information. We may
get a lead to its whereabouts."

"We'd better," Scotty said grimly. "Unless someone has seen it, we have
the whole Sulu Sea to search!"




CHAPTER V

Trail of the "Sampaguita"


The PAL plane droned westward, over the incredible swamps of the Pulangi
River, toward Cotabato. Rick watched the sweltering marshland unfold
below and caught glimpses of the winding brown river that turned the
countryside into a morass. From Colonel Rojas' briefing he knew that the
countryside was alive with crocodiles and less pleasant creatures.

In the seat next to Rick, Scotty catnapped. Zircon, across the aisle,
was apparently deep in thought.

Rick hoped fervently that they weren't on a wild-goose chase. At Davao
they had learned that Briotti, Shannon, and their guide had been
kidnaped by some group the Bagobos feared. The reason for the kidnaping
could not be guessed. No requests for ransom had been made, and the
scientists had no known personal enemies.

Instead of clearing up the mystery, Rick thought, the little they had
found had only deepened it. His concern for his missing friends had
turned to a deep fear that they might not be found until too late. He
was very conscious of the passage of time. Nearly three weeks had
elapsed since the scientists had been forcefully taken from the Bagobo
village.

"Think they were taken away on the boat?" Scotty asked suddenly.

Rick turned quickly. Scotty hadn't been napping after all. "We can't be
sure, but doesn't it seem likely?"

"It does to me. Of course the kidnapers might have carried them into the
interior, but I can't imagine anyone carrying prisoners over those
jungle trails. Besides, the boat is missing."

"There are no roads where they could have been taken by car," Rick
agreed. "Lacson will try to find the cars that brought them into Davao,
but even if he succeeds, it won't tell us much." He changed the subject.
"Who could those men have been? They must have been pretty fierce to
frighten the Bagobos. That headman doesn't look like a man who scares
easily."

"I haven't the glimmer of an idea. Kidnaping two scientists makes no
sense at all."

"True. But it must have made sense to the kidnapers."

Scotty didn't comment further. After a while Rick reached under the seat
and drew out Shannon's quiver. He had wrapped it in a plastic bag in
which his trousers had been returned by the dry cleaner.

The quiver was of soft leather, and made to be slung on the back. It was
compartmented for three kinds of arrows. Rick drew one out and saw that
it was a blunt type for hunting small game. Next to the blunt ones were
razor-sharp broadhead arrows. The third variety was smaller broadheads.
There were a dozen of each.

On the back of the quiver were two zippered pouches. In the first Rick
found four new bowstrings and beeswax for waxing them, plus a small file
and a whetstone for keeping the broadheads sharp. In the other
compartment were two sets of finger cots, or protectors, and a stiff
leather arm guard. He slipped a protector, made like sections of glove
fingers, on the first three fingers of his right hand. A size too large,
but it would do. The arm guard would be all right when he adjusted it.

The bow was in its own special compartment. Rick checked and saw that it
was undamaged. It was in two sections, the upper limb made to be fitted
into the handle, which was permanently attached to the lower limb. It
was an excellent bow, not as heavy as some, but a deadly weapon in the
hands of a good shot. It pulled fifty pounds at twenty-eight inches
draw.

Rick slipped the quiver back under the seat. He planned to carry it when
necessary, so that he, too, would be armed. He was a better than average
bowman. It was one of the few sports in which he could nearly always
beat Scotty, thanks to his own aptitude and Shannon's teaching. He
noticed suddenly that the seat belt light had flashed on. He tightened
his belt as the plane descended into Cotabato.

He watched as the city came into view. It was a community of small
houses located on a series of rivers or canals. The surrounding
countryside was given over to rice paddies and occasional coconut
groves.

This was the first step in the backward trail. Rick had no idea what
they might find, but lacking any other course of action they had decided
to go back along the _Sampaguita's_ route hoping to pick up a clue. They
would stay in Cotabato only as long as the plane stopped, just time
enough to meet Tony Briotti's friend, Father Murray, an American
missionary priest.

As the plane swept in for a landing across the unpaved runway Rick saw
the white robes of a priest and knew that Major Lacson's message to the
Cotabato constabulary detachment asking that the priest meet the plane
had been received.

Father Murray, a lean, tanned, sun-helmeted man of youthful appearance,
greeted them as they stepped from the plane. Zircon introduced himself
and the boys, and the four retired to the shade of a royal palm to talk.

"Tony and Howard's disappearance was shocking news," Father Murray
commented. "You have no new information about what happened to them?"

Zircon told him the little they knew. "We stopped by to see you, hoping
you could shed some light on the kidnaping."

The priest shook his head. "I haven't the remotest idea. Their visit
here was without incident, except for a robbery attempt. I don't even
recall any conversation that might be helpful. We talked mostly about
their research project."

"You mentioned a robbery?" Rick asked.

"Yes, the first night they were here. Thieves broke into the _convento_,
but by good luck, some of my Christian parishioners who live next door
were awake. They hurried to the rescue with guns, and the thieves fled
before they found where we were sleeping. My people said they were
Moros."

Zircon gestured at a group of Moros lounging in the shade of the wooden
airport building. "You seem to have quite a few of them here."

Father Murray chuckled. "Indeed we do. This is a Moro province. Both the
mayor and governor are Moros. Christians are few."

Rick noted the tight trousers and bolero-type vests that exposed
muscular chests. Two of the Moros wore purple velvet caps. The others
wore straw hats of intricately woven design that reminded him of
helmets.

"Was a Moro guide with our friends?" Zircon asked.

"Yes. He seemed like a respectable young man. I saw little of him,
however. He stayed with us, but kept to himself, probably bored with our
talk. Did you know that Tony and I were classmates in high school?"

The three hadn't known it. No wonder Tony and Shannon had gone so far
out of their way to visit Cotabato.

"That robbery attempt interests me," Scotty said. "Have you ever had
such an incident before?"

"Never. The Moros let us alone. Besides, the proverbial church mice
would seem rich compared with us. We have literally nothing worth
robbing."

The flight was called and the Spindrifters shook hands with Father
Murray. He waved as they boarded the plane and prepared to take off.

"Not very helpful," Professor Zircon remarked, "although I'm glad we had
a chance to meet Father Murray."

Rick agreed, but added, "Doesn't it strike you as pretty strange
coincidence that thieves should try to rob him for the first time, on
the night Briotti and Shannon arrived?"

Scotty saw at once what Rick meant. "You think they might not have been
thieves? That it might have been a kidnap attempt that failed?"

"It's a possibility," Rick pointed out.

Zircon leaned across the aisle. "Consider the implications of what
you're saying, Rick. Cotabato is a long way from Davao. Why would a gang
chase our friends across Mindanao?"

"Why were they kidnaped?" Rick retorted.

"Obviously, we don't know. If we accept your idea, do we assume it was
the same gang that traveled from Cotabato to Davao? Or, were both groups
local people?"

Scotty swallowed. "If they were local people, that has to mean some kind
of well-organized syndicate with members in just about every port!"

Rick nodded. He had seen at once the implications of his idea. "It could
mean that."

Scotty sank back into his seat. "But whatever it means, it gives no
explanation of why Tony and Shannon were kidnaped."

"We'll find the explanation somehow," Rick said, with more assurance
than he felt. He added grimly, "We've got to!"




CHAPTER VI

The Man in the Red Fez


The famous tropical port of Zamboanga lived up to its reputation as an
exotic place. As the taxi carried the Spindrifters from the airport past
the waterfront area, Rick saw bright-colored sails mixed with the drab
steel of cargo ships. There were many Moros, but Christian Filipinos
seemed to be in the majority.

The taxi took them to Bayot's Hotel, a rambling, picturesque affair only
two stories high, noted for the best food in the Sulu Sea region. The
hotel was almost overgrown with orchids and lush tropical creepers.

As the three checked in, Zircon began asking questions of the man at the
desk. "You had Dr. Briotti and Dr. Shannon as guests, I believe?"

"Yes. They stayed here for two days. I read of their disappearance.
Incredible."

"Can you tell us if they had any visitors?"

"I recall none."

Rick asked, "Did anyone show unusual interest in them?"

"Not that one could notice. You realize, Americans are not an unusual
sight. There are a number who live here."

"Did you know their Moro guide?" Scotty queried.

"I did not know him. I saw him, however. He was an unusual type."

"In what way?" Zircon asked quickly.

"He spoke no Chebucano. When I asked about this he said he was brought
up in Tawi Tawi where Chebucano is not spoken. I might have believed
this, except for one other thing."

"Yes?" Zircon prompted.

"He spoke excellent Spanish, which also is not spoken on Tawi Tawi."

Rick asked thoughtfully, "You think he might not have been a Moro?"

The man shrugged. "What is a Moro? It is simply a Filipino, of a
different religion, and to some extent a different way of life. An
educated Moro is like any other educated Filipino. I cannot say if this
guide was a Moro. He said he was."

Zircon nodded his understanding. "Do you know if they hired him here?"

"They did. I mean in this city, not in my hotel. I believe they met him
on the waterfront."

Rick had seen at once that the man was not a Filipino, and he thought he
recognized the accent as Spanish. He asked, "Are you the manager?"

"Yes. I may say, these questions you ask have already been answered by
me to Captain Lim of the constabulary. Perhaps he can help you."

"We intend to see him," Zircon replied. "Is his office nearby?"

"No, you will need a car, which I will arrange. He is at the fort,
Nuestra Señora Del Pilar. We call it simply Fort Pilar. Now I will show
you to your rooms."

Zircon had a room to himself, while Rick and Scotty shared one. The
rooms were small, and like all tropic hotel rooms, sparsely furnished
but adequate. The three changed clothes quickly and got into their
comfortable khaki trousers and shirts. When they returned to the lobby,
the manager had a car waiting, with one of the hotel's employees to
drive it.

Fort Pilar was a tremendous mass of hand-cut stone many feet thick,
pierced for muskets and cannon. It was obviously Spanish in design, and
very old. The walls were covered with creepers, and palms had sprung up
on what had once been a parade ground. Visible beyond the fort were the
clear waters of Basilan Strait.

A sentry took them to Captain Diosdado Lim, who greeted them courteously
and scanned the letter they had brought from Colonel Rojas.

"We are at your service," the captain said formally. "This letter makes
you more than guests. You are also friends. I welcome you."

"Thank you, Captain," Zircon replied with equal formality. "You knew of
our coming from Major Lacson?"

"Yes. We are prepared. We will send your car back and you will ride into
town with me. I will introduce you to the man from whom the boat was
hired."

"Any news of the boat?" Rick asked hopefully.

"Not yet. The seas are big and our outposts are few. But we will hope
for good fortune."

The captain had a stilted way of speaking, Rick noted. His English was
good, but he obviously didn't speak it often. The officer was young and
dark, and looked more Chinese than Filipino. He was probably a mestizo,
a person of mixed blood.

Zircon launched into questions as soon as they got underway in the
captain's sedan. It was soon clear that the officer had little to add to
what they already knew. He did say, however, that Azid Hajullah, the
Moro guide, had not been a local young man, and that the detachment on
Tawi Tawi did not know him. No one, apparently, knew where the guide had
come from. It sounded suspicious to Rick. He might have been a plant, to
betray the scientists to the unknown kidnapers.

Captain Lim took them to the boatyard operated by José Santos, a fat
little Filipino who had once served in the United States Navy. Santos
was friendly, and very sad about the scientists. Rick felt he honestly
was more disturbed about the two men than about his missing boat.

The _Sampaguita_, he said, was a thirty-foot auxiliary sloop with white
hull and red sails. It had once been the private yacht of an American
copra planter on Basilan who, alas, had been murdered by his Moro field
hands. Santos had not known the Moro guide, and had noticed nothing
unusual about him. And there the interview ended. Rick shook his head.
They were certainly not making progress.

"Is there anything I can do?" Captain Lim asked.

"I'm afraid not," Zircon replied. "Thank you, Captain. If you don't
mind, we'll walk back to the hotel. It's only a short distance. And I'm
sure the boys want to see this part of town. I do."

"Of course. Anyway, you must be my guests for dinner at the hotel. At
ten o'clock."

"We'll be delighted," Zircon answered. "Will you go back to the fort
now?"

"No. If you want me I will be at home, behind the hotel. It is the small
white cottage."

The three waved good-by, then turned toward the teeming wharf area,
which was also the town's market place. Just beyond the breakwater,
native outrigger boats with bright-colored sails in stripes and patterns
swept by in a kind of convoy.

Scotty asked an elderly Filipino who was watching, "Sir, may I ask the
name of that kind of boat?"

The Filipino smiled. "Colorful, yes? They are vintas. Moro boats from
Sulu Sea. They come to sell fish."

Scotty thanked him and the three walked slowly through the market place.
By unspoken consent they said nothing about their problem. All of them
knew they had reached a dead end, and none knew where to go from this
point.

They stopped once to watch two fighting cocks sparring with shielded
spurs. A few yards away they stopped once more, at a fruit vendor's
stall. Many of the fruits were new and strange. They took a moment to
learn about them from the vendor. There were mangosteens, not related to
mangoes, with red husks and pure-white fruit; lanzones that looked like
clusters of brown plums; foul-smelling but tasty durian; star apples,
and several varieties of banana, none of which looked like the Central
American variety.

Rick tried a mangosteen. He passed sections of the white fruit to Scotty
and Zircon, then bit into his, It was cool, tart, and delicious, unlike
anything he had ever tasted before. He decided he could become a
mangosteen addict in no time and started back to buy a bagful. A low
comment from Scotty stopped him.

"We've picked up a friend. He's been with us for the past ten minutes."

"Let's stop at this stand and look at the baskets," Zircon invited
casually.

They did so, and pretended great interest in the huge variety of woven
ware while Scotty maneuvered to look back the way they had come. Rick
saw his pal's face change, then Scotty fingered a basket and used it as
a cover while talking.

"It's nice to find a familiar face in a strange place," Scotty said.
"Believe it or not, it's the man in the red fez who trailed us in
Manila!"

"Are you certain?" Zircon asked swiftly.

"Yes. It isn't just the fez, it's the face. Besides, he's wearing the
same clothes."

Zircon's normally loud voice dropped to a whisper. "Lay a plan, Scotty.
We'll mousetrap him. I have a few questions I'd like to ask."

"All right. Let's move on and look for a place. This is too crowded."

They sauntered on, elaborately casual, stopping now and then to examine
goods in an open market stall or to marvel at the colors of fish offered
for sale. Rick wondered about the man in the red fez. Since he had
trailed them in Manila, and had come all the way to Zamboanga, his
interest in them must be linked to the missing scientists. Maybe, if the
man would talk, they could finally learn something of value!

Rick kept his eyes open, watching for a likely place to set a trap. He
saw that the market place ended in an open park that ran along both
sides of the street leading from the wharves into town. Up the street,
where the park ended, he saw a big warehouse marked with the name MANUAL
WEE SIT & CO.

"That shed is the best bet," Scotty said softly. "Let's step it up a
little, walk to the end of the warehouse, then go around the corner.
Look for a doorway in which we can wait for him."

The three walked faster, but only as tourists might do who had left an
interesting area and wanted to go elsewhere. They passed the end of the
warehouse and rounded the corner. There was an open shed-type door
there, and seated in front of it on a nail keg was an elderly Chinese,
smoking his water pipe and getting the afternoon sun. He didn't look up
at the three Americans.

"Step in the doorway," Scotty said swiftly. "The old man must be
dreaming about something. He won't bother us."

It was cool and dim in the warehouse. Rick saw flour barrels and case
after case of canned food, many with American brand names.

Scotty took a position just inside the door where he could watch through
the opening. In a moment he tensed, ready to spring. Rick saw the Moro's
shadow just as Scotty leaped.

Rick ran out, Zircon right behind him, in time to see Scotty confront
the Moro. The man's eyes widened. His hand flashed to his sash with the
speed of a striking snake and emerged with a short dagger, a vicious
thing with a wavy blade like a kris.

Scotty didn't hesitate. He let go with a punch that had his powerful
shoulder behind it. But fast as Scotty was, the Moro dodged, then lunged
forward with the knife.

Rick sprang forward to help, but Scotty was ready. The boy stepped to
one side and in the same motion grabbed the wrist that held the knife.
He doubled the Moro's arm back, twisting at the same time. Rick ran to
pick up the knife as it fell.

The Moro hadn't given up. He kicked out, his foot catching Scotty under
the armpit, breaking his hold. The Moro broke free and started to run.

"Get him!" Zircon bellowed.

Scotty dove, both hands outstretched, with Rick right behind him. One
of Scotty's hands caught the Moro by shirt and jacket, stopping him long
enough for the other hand to get a grip, too. The Moro plunged wildly
and the clothing ripped loose. By then Rick was in position. He
delivered a judo chop to the side of the Moro's neck. The man slumped to
the ground, the red fez dropping into the dust.

For the first time Rick got a look at the Moro's back, where Scotty's
frantic grab had bared it. The man was tattooed with a strange design. A
Moro kris was crossed with a barong, and both weapons dripped blood.
Above the knives, in bright blue ink, was a symbol composed of a short
horizontal line from which three vertical lines rose. The middle
vertical line was slightly taller than the other two.

[Illustration: _The man's back was tattooed with a strange design_]

Sound smote Rick's ears. He turned swiftly and saw that the old Chinese
had come to frightened life. The old man's eyes were open wide, staring
at the tattooed design. His mouth was open, and he was wailing at such
high pitch that Rick flinched.

Then the old man babbled something and ran like one possessed into the
shelter of the warehouse.

Scotty stared after him in amazement. "What got into him? He ran as
though he'd got a sudden look at the devil!"

Zircon hauled the groggy Moro to his feet. "Possibly he did," the
physicist stated. He pointed to the symbol. "This looks like a Chinese
character. Perhaps the old man recognized it."

Swift excitement ran through Rick. "If he did, maybe we've just hit a
jackpot!"




CHAPTER VII

News at Zamboanga


A crowd of Filipinos, including several Moros, was attracted by the
brief fight. A few departed in a hurry after one look at the captive's
bared back. The rest remained at a distance, talking in the local
dialect. Rick and Scotty kept alert, ready to act if anyone tried to
free the captive. Scotty had tied him up with his own sash. He was
seated against the warehouse wall, sullen and silent.

Zircon emerged from the warehouse. "I got the captain on the phone. He's
on his way."

Apparently the captain wasted no time. In less than two minutes his
sedan skidded to a stop and he jumped out. "What is going on?"

"He was trailing us," Zircon said, indicating the Moro. "He also trailed
us in Manila. We thought it best to try to find out why. Incidentally,
an old Chinese is hiding in the warehouse. He ran when he saw the symbol
on the Moro's back. It may be a Chinese character of some sort."

Captain Lim inspected the design and nodded. "It is. I know Chinese.
Those lines form the word for 'shan,' which in English is mountain. But
I have no idea why it should frighten the old man. I will ask."

The three Spindrifters looked at each other, excitement on all of their
faces. "Now we know the word the headman at the Bagobo village used,"
Zircon commented. "Shan, or mountain."

They waited, keeping close watch on the crowd until Captain Lim emerged.
The officer shook his head. "I could get little from him. He fears the
'Pirates of Shan,' of which he says this Moro is a member. He would not
elaborate."

"Who are the Pirates of Shan?" Rick demanded.

"I don't know. The phrase is new to me."

"Silly," Scotty muttered. "Piracy has been dead for a century."

"Not so," Lim corrected. "Excuse me, but piracy is not uncommon,
especially along the China coast and in the islands south of Borneo.
Only a short time ago Chinese pirates captured an ocean-going cargo
ship."

"He's right," Zircon confirmed. "I've read of piracy quite recently. And
don't forget, the Moros of Sulu were a pirate nation until Spanish
gunboats and troops cut down the activity, and the Americans finally
stopped it. Piracy is not new to this part of the world."

Scotty helped Captain Lim put the Moro in the sedan. "I will be
surprised if we get much from this man," Lim said, "but we can try at
the Fort. I will see you at dinner tonight."

The crowd dispersed and the three walked back to the hotel. Zircon left
them in the lobby. "Be back shortly. I'm going to wire Okola about
pirates."

In their room the boys took off their outer clothes and sprawled on
their beds in shorts. "This is shaping up to something big," Rick said
thoughtfully.

"I know what you mean. Robbery at Cotabato, kidnaping at Davao, and now
this. It must tie together. Apparently some people have heard of the
Pirates of Shan, but most haven't."

"Strange the constabulary doesn't know about them. But I suppose it's
natural enough in an area like this, with only a few troops and millions
of square miles. But why would pirates take our friends?"

Scotty didn't even try to guess. "Isn't Chahda due pretty soon?" he
asked.

"Not until eight." Rick had given Chahda details of the findings at the
Bagobo village and the Hindu boy had decided to spend another day in
Davao. He would join them at Bayot's.

"At least we're collecting some pieces that add up," Rick said with more
satisfaction than he had felt in a long time. He closed his eyes and
began to review the information they had obtained. Presently he drifted
off to sleep.

Scotty woke Rick some time later. "Wake up! Chahda's here."

Rick sat up, blinking. "What time is it?"

"After nine. We're due at dinner shortly."

"Where's Chahda?"

"Getting cleaned up. He'll be back."

"Where's Zircon?"

"Gone out. He had a call from the hotel desk."

Rick got into the shower for a quick wake-up bath. By the time he was
dressed Zircon had returned, a yellow sheet of paper in his hands.
Chahda arrived a moment later.

"All here," Chahda said. "Good. Now I tell. You know who got our
friends? Pirates!"

Rick stared at him in awe. "How did you find that out?"

"Word you said, one that scared Bagobos. I said it too, in few places at
Davao. I try different ways to say, and I must have said it good one
time. Filipino snapped at me to shut up, because word no good. But did
Chahda shut up?"

"Never," Scotty said emphatically.

"Is true. Anyway, Filipino whispers to me about Pirates of Shan. He
knows little. Only that they kill quick, and no one knows who is a
pirate and who is not. Not many have heard of them."

"Some have," Zircon interjected. He waved the paper. "Okola replied by
return wire. Listen."

The big physicist read: "'Pirates of Shan date back to seventeenth
century. Originally Chinese Moslems, later joined by Filipino Moslems
and some Malays. Most active around 1800. Shan is from Chinese word for
mountain, but no one knows what mountain. Some believe Shan located near
Borneo coast. Some mention pirates in action against Japanese during
World War Two. No record since. Regret no more available.'"

"Okola certainly knows his history," Scotty stated. "Well, at least we
have a tag to hang on the enemy. The kidnapers were pirates."

Zircon agreed. "Being trailed by one certainly seems to tie up with Tony
and Howard's disappearance. And speaking of kidnapers, that Filipino
boy, Elpidio Torres was kidnaped. His folks now have a ransom demand."
He held out a recent newspaper.

Rick scanned the front-page story. "Think there might be a connection?"

"Possible, I suppose, but consider the distance. According to the story,
a ransom of one million pesos is to be left on the Batangas coast, south
of Manila."

Scotty whistled. "Half a million bucks! That would make piracy worth
while!"

"Yes, but Manila isn't the Sulu Sea," Zircon pointed out. "Also, there
has been no ransom demand for Tony and Howard. They weren't taken until
some time after the Torres boy vanished."

"What we do now?" Chahda asked.

"We eat, with the local constabulary chief," Rick replied. "Think it's
safe to join us?"

Chahda grinned. "Safe or no, I go. I hungry."

Rick and Scotty were hungry, too. The Spanish-Filipino custom of dining
late did not appeal to them. But as it developed, dinner was worth
waiting for. Captain Lim was apparently a gourmet. He had ordered soup
made of smoked oysters from Palawan Island, a second course of delicate
butterfly fish fillets in a marvelous sauce of fresh coconut, a main
course of breasts of chicken boiled in coconut milk, a salad of hearts
of palm, a Spanish dessert called _lecheflan_, which was a kind of
custard swimming in caramel sauce, and thick, aromatic Batangas coffee.

Rick and Scotty ate until they could hold no more, and Chahda groaned,
"Once I read words 'stuffed like Christmas goose.' This now fits me."

Zircon lighted a Manila cigar and sat back in his chair, a look of pure
contentment on his face. "A wonderful meal, Captain. Thank you, for all
of us. I haven't dined so well in months."

Captain Lim beamed his pleasure. "Then you may forgive me for failing
with the Moro. He would say nothing. I have no legal grounds on which to
hold him for long, either."

Zircon nodded his understanding. "We expected nothing, but we had to
try. Chahda, tell Captain Lim what you found out in Davao, and I'll give
him Okola's message."

The exchange of information completed, Zircon changed the subject. The
scientist knew they were in need of something to take their minds off
the search for a while, and he encouraged Captain Lim to tell them about
Zamboanga and its long and sometimes bloody history.

The officer turned out to be an entertaining story-teller. He kept them
laughing, or on the edges of their chairs until after midnight. Then he
began teaching them the famous song that goes:

    _The monkeys have no tails in Zamboanga!
    The monkeys have no tails in Zamboanga!
    The monkeys have no tails;
    They were bitten off by whales!
    Oh, the monkeys have no tails in Zamboanga!_

The Spindrifters had just gotten into the swing of the rollicking melody
when a sergeant came in with a message for the captain. Lim tore the
envelope open and read rapidly. Then he slapped his hand on the table.
"Good! This is from Major Lacson. A boat answering the description of
the _Sampaguita_ was seen about four days after the kidnaping, heading
south of the island of Bulan. A fisherman saw it."

Rick's heart leaped with sudden hope and excitement. "Where is Bulan?"

"Across the Strait from here is Basilan. Bulan is a small island south
of it."

Scotty said with relief, "At least we know now which way they're
heading."

"And we know what to do next," Zircon added.

"We go after it!" Chahda concluded grimly.




CHAPTER VIII

The "Swift Arrow"


José Santos' boatyard was not large, but to Rick it seemed as though the
Filipino boatman had a sample of every kind of craft from a rowboat to a
Chinese junk.

"We want a boat," Zircon stated. "Not a sailboat. That would be too
slow. We want something reasonably fast, and with enough room for
comfort. We may have to live aboard for some time."

Santos nodded. "You no care how big?"

"There are four of us to handle it."

"Plenty," Santos said. "No more help needed for my _Swift Arrow_. See
over there?"

Rick's quick eyes caught the lines of the craft first. He exclaimed,
"Well, I'll be a galloping grampus! It's a torpedo boat!"

"Yes," Santos confirmed, beaming. "Motor torpedo boat. I convert her
myself. Come see."

Chahda asked, "Rick, what is torpedo boat?"

"It's a very fast, light boat, designed to launch torpedoes at bigger
ships. It depends on speed for safety. This one must be left over from
World War Two."

"Plenty old," Chahda said doubtfully.

Scotty chuckled. "Age doesn't mean anything to a boat if it's well built
and well taken care of. The MTB's were light, but very well built.
You'll see."

Zircon was well acquainted with boats and Rick and Scotty were not
novices. They went over the _Swift Arrow_ from stem to stern, missing
nothing. The armament had been removed and the original gasoline engines
were gone. Instead, it was operated by a pair of marine diesels. Santos
claimed that the engines were in excellent shape and that the boat could
make a speed of twenty knots even in rough water, with a top speed of
nearly thirty knots in calm seas.

Scotty checked the engines and confirmed the claim. They ran like Swiss
watches. The boat was fully equipped, even to searchlight, horn, and a
brass saluting cannon that fired blanks much like shotgun shells.

"We'll take it," Zircon announced. "Fill it with fuel and water, put
charts for the whole area aboard with navigation instruments, and we'll
be back in an hour and get under way." He hastily signed a traveler's
check for the advance fee, then the four hiked back to the hotel and got
down to business.

They made up a provision list, arranged to rent bed linens and towels
from the hotel, found out where ammunition could be purchased, packed
their bags, and prepared to check out.

Chahda spoke up. "Where you go first? Jolo, maybe? Suppose I go ahead on
PAL, and snoop round a little. Meet you there."

Zircon considered. "I suppose Jolo is the logical destination. It's the
capital of the Sulu Archipelago. We'll refuel there, probably by
tomorrow morning."

Rick thought it was probably a good idea for Chahda to go ahead. He
could use his Indian contacts to pick up any information that might be
available. It would save them time. "I'm for it," he said.

Zircon made sure Chahda had ample funds, then the three bade him good-by
for the time being and started on their shopping tour.

Within the promised hour they had their luggage and provisions loaded
aboard and were prepared to cast off. Santos had the boat ready, even to
putting in a box of shells for the saluting cannon.

Scotty and Rick cast off while Zircon sent the MTB smoothly away from
the dock, through the breakwater and into Basilan Strait. Then Scotty
took over, while Zircon checked the first leg of their course. On the
charts Santos had given them the routes between principal ports were
clearly marked. Zircon found the route from Zamboanga to Jolo and gave
Scotty the first compass setting.

Scotty opened the throttle wide. The _Swift Arrow_ responded instantly,
planing along at a fast clip. Zircon took sightings with the pelorus,
then calculated his readings.

Rick watched with interest, anxious to find out what speed they were
making. Finally the big physicist looked up, grinning. "We've picked a
champion. Twenty-eight knots!"

It was far below the original speed of the craft, but probably far above
the speed of anything else in the Sulu Sea. Rick was satisfied. "I'm
going below. I'll store the chow, then relieve Scotty."

In a short time, taking turns at the helm, the three had everything
stowed and bunks ready for occupancy. Zircon and Scotty had broken out
the newly purchased ammunition and loaded their weapons. Rick hung
Shannon's quiver on a hook near the bunks.

The _Swift Arrow_ sped steadily on. Basilan dropped astern as they
negotiated the countless islands of the Pilas Group. Two islands formed
a narrow channel ahead, Rick saw, as he took the wheel from Scotty. Once
through the channel they would be in open water, nothing between them
and Jolo but the Sulu Sea.

Scotty walked to the bow, to check on the readiness of the anchor. In a
moment he returned and joined Rick. "Must be good fishing country. Lots
of vintas in the channel ahead."

Rick had noticed. "Must be two dozen." Between the islands, the channel
was dotted with red, purple, green, and brown sails. As the MTB drew
nearer, Rick throttled down a little. He was already traveling at
cruising speed, considerably less than top speed, but he didn't want to
take a chance of ramming one of the Moro craft.

The distance closed rapidly, and Zircon pointed out that the vintas
seemed to be spreading in a line across the channel, only a boat's
length between them. "Slow down more," he advised. "They may be hauling
a net or something."

Rick did so, keeping a careful eye out for net floats. "Not much room to
go through. I'll toot the horn."

He gave the horn a long blast. The Moros paid no attention. Apparently
fishing boats had the right of way, and they didn't intend to move. The
_Swift Arrow_ was close enough now, so he could see the triangular masts
and the booms of the lateen sails. He could make out the crews, too. The
boats seemed to be crowded with men.

"They're not going to make way!" Zircon exclaimed. The MTB was already
well within the channel.

"They're intercepting us front and rear!" Scotty yelled. "Look!"

The vintas on the ends of the line had moved rapidly, and the rest
followed. The MTB would soon be surrounded! Rick spun the wheel and
turned the big boat nearly in its own length, heeling far over. In the
same instant a rifle slug splintered wood on the cabin roof overhead.

Scotty jumped for his rifle and started firing. Zircon hauled the
automatic from his belt and yelled, "Gun it, Rick!"

Rick didn't need the advice. He straightened the MTB out and rammed the
throttles to full speed. Slugs smacked into the hull or blossomed as
stars on the glass of the pilothouse. He made the MTB dance through the
water at top speed. His evasive action made it hard for Scotty and
Zircon to fire accurately and they stopped.

In a few moments they were out of range of the vintas. Zircon called out
a new course that would take them through another channel more to the
west. It was longer, but safer.

The three remained silent while Rick got on the new course. Attack by
vintas in open water was about the last thing any of them had expected.

Finally Zircon slipped the clip from his pistol, ejected the shell in
the chamber, and reloaded. The scientist said severely, "Mr. Scott, on a
certain occasion at Zamboanga yesterday, you were heard to make a remark
to the effect that piracy has been dead for a century. In view of our
recent experience, I believe it is only fair to offer an opportunity to
correct the record."

Scotty bowed ceremoniously. "You are most kind, Dr. Zircon. It would
perhaps be more accurate to state that piracy has not been dead for a
century. My conclusion is entirely empirical, of course, but observation
leads me to conclude that the vintas in the channel may indeed have been
manned by pirates."

"Handsomely said, Mr. Scott. You have a comment, Mr. Brant?"

"I concur," Rick said gravely. "Would you care to hazard a surmise about
the identity of these putative pirates?"

Zircon stroked his chin thoughtfully. "We had no opportunity to remove
shirts and examine backs. Yet I must venture the opinion that the men in
the vintas carry the mark of the mountain."

"And why did they lay in wait for us?" Scotty asked.

"My surmise," Zircon boomed, "is that we are doing exactly the right
thing. They fear our ultimate success. Ergo, they try to remove us."

Rick had to grin. "I've always wanted to hear someone say 'ergo.' But
how did they know we were coming?"

Zircon shook his head. "The islands in the vicinity are too small to
have radio or telephone. However, we've not been too careful about our
plans. The waiter last night, or a houseboy outside our hotel door could
have overheard us, and a vinta could have gotten here in time to lay a
trap."

"We'll probably never be sure," Rick said. Suddenly he grinned widely.
He had the feeling they were making progress.

"At least," he stated, "we've met the Pirates of Shan!"




CHAPTER IX

The Moro Knives


Rick walked to the bow as the _Swift Arrow_ approached the harbor of
Jolo in the early-morning hours. He used Shannon's long glass to inspect
some curious-looking houses to the west of the harbor entrance. The
glass showed him they were built on stilts over the water, and connected
by a series of bamboo walkways.

Zircon joined him and borrowed the glass for a look. "Samal village," he
explained. "I've never seen one, but I spent last night reading a pocket
guide I picked up at Bayot's. The Samals are Moros, noted as fishermen."

"And pirates?"

Zircon smiled. "The book didn't say."

In spite of the primitive Samal village, the dock and the city were
fairly modern. As Scotty took the _Swift Arrow_ closer, Rick and Zircon
looked for a place to tie up.

Chahda saved them the trouble. The Hindu boy appeared on a bale of abacá
and waved both arms until they saw him, then he motioned them to the
left and ran down the dock. Scotty swung the MTB past the dock and saw a
smaller dock where a few pleasure boats were tied up. In a moment they
were alongside. Chahda caught the line Rick threw and hauled the bow in.

The Hindu boy jumped aboard as soon as they were tied up. "You early,"
he greeted them.

"We could have been here last night, but we decided to take it easy and
not risk running into vintas and things in the darkness," Rick replied.

"It was a fine trip," Scotty added. "We met some friends."

"Friends? You meaning purposies?"

"Porpoises," Rick corrected. "Not exactly. He means pirates. They took
some shots at us."

Chahda's wide eyes took in the bullet holes. He muttered to himself in
Hindi.

"We were a little surprised," Zircon added. "We're not even sure they
were especially after us. They might have been waiting for any craft
that came along. We can't imagine how they could communicate so rapidly,
unless they had advance notice of our plans."

Chahda shook his head. "Smarter than you think, these Moros. Sometimes
use strange way to get letter far distances. I amazed."

"What is this strange way?" Zircon asked.

"You know there plenty parrots here? Moros teach birds to talk, then
tell message and say, 'Okay bird. You go now and tell Charlie.'"

Rick and Zircon stared at the Hindu boy incredulously, but Scotty had
been the object of Chahda's humor often enough to recognize it first. He
grabbed the lithe brown boy and held him out over the muddy harbor
waters in spite of his struggles.

"Take it back!" he demanded.

"Is took!" Chahda yelled. He straightened his shirt as Scotty hauled him
in again, and looked at the dark-haired boy accusingly. "That plenty
good yarn. You just scooptical, that's all."

"Skeptical," Rick corrected.

"Is so. Anyway, if parrots don't fly, pigeons do. Sometimes my Indian
friends use pigeons for messages to islands with no radios. So why not
pirates?"

Why not? Rick thought Chahda very likely had the answer. Carrier pigeons
would serve a useful purpose in a remote place like the Sulu Sea, and
one could have reached the channel from Zamboanga after they departed.

"Let's go into the cabin," Zircon suggested. The boys followed him and
took seats on the bunks, waiting expectantly.

"Let's start with Chahda. Learn anything?"

The Hindu boy nodded. "Little. Some peoples here think pirates took
plenty boats now missing. Not many hear of pirates, but more than in
Davao."

"Any guesses on their hideout?" Scotty asked.

"None good. Some say far to south, maybe near Tawi Tawi. Plenty small
islands, no people."

"I agree," Zircon added. "I've studied the chart, and that seems to be
the most likely area. We can go right on to Borneo, if need be. It's
only about a hundred and twenty-five miles from Jolo. It's even possible
the pirate hangout is off the Borneo coast."

Rick spoke up. "I've been thinking about that pirate attack. Yesterday
we got away through sheer speed, right? Well, word about our speed will
spread. Now, we don't want the pirates to give up because our boat is
too fast for them. We want them to think they can attack us
successfully, because the attacks are our best clue to whether or not
we're on the right track."

He believed that no further attack would mean they were getting cold,
while increasing attacks would mean they were getting warm, to use the
old game terms. The closer to the pirate stronghold, the more determined
the attacks would be, particularly if the pirates saw a chance of taking
over the MTB.

Scotty saw what Rick had in mind. "You mean we have to convince them
we're no longer fast?"

"That's it. There must be pirate spies here in Jolo. Why not plant a
story that one engine is bad?"

"Very good!" Zircon exclaimed. "We could do it by trying, very publicly,
to get some engine part. Which one, Scotty? It has to be one we won't be
able to get."

Scotty thought it over while the others watched him anxiously, then
suddenly he snapped his fingers. "Got it. A new timing gear. I'll be
surprised if there's one nearer than Manila. I can juggle the spark, so
the engine sounds as though the timing were off. That will make it more
convincing."

Zircon rose. "We'll do it. Chahda, you've seen the town. Can you stand
by while the rest of us make a quick trip? We must see the constabulary,
and I have a purchase to make."

"Gladly do," Chahda assented. "First I go and get suitcase. This time I
stay with you until we find our friends."

The Hindu boy got his luggage and a paper-wrapped package from the dock
guard's hut. Rick and the others left him to guard the _Swift Arrow_.

The main street of Jolo started only a few hundred feet from the dock
area. Wooden stores and houses predominated, but there were a few of
ancient stone. The people were almost entirely Moro, with only a
sprinkling of Christian Filipinos. They saw no other Americans, although
a few lived in the town.

"Wish we had more time here," Zircon remarked. "After all, Jolo is the
seat of Islam in this part of the world."

"Of what?" Scotty asked.

"Islam is the proper name for the religion we called Mohammedanism.
Moros are Moslems. The name is from the old Spanish for Moor. This
island--my guidebook says--is the home of the Sultan of Sulu, the
spiritual head of Islam in the Philippines."

Rick noted a strange pair of men making their way down the street. Their
skins were brown, but their bushy hair was an odd orange red. They
walked with knees bent sharply, as though on the verge of sitting down.
Their legs were spindly, the knees prominent.

"Bajaus," Zircon said. "Sea gypsies. I recognize them from my talks with
Tony. He was interested in studying them. They spend their entire lives
in vintas, usually in a squatting position. That's the reason for the
odd posture. They have trouble standing upright. Their hair is that
color because sun and salt have bleached it."

A pair of Moros went by, carrying a bamboo pole from which a dozen small
sharks were suspended by the gills. Rick saw that the fins had been cut
off, probably bought by some Chinese for making soup.

There were shops everywhere. Zircon looked them over carefully. "Watch
for a hardware store," he requested.

They reached the constabulary office before finding a hardware store,
however. Rick and Scotty decided to wait outside and enjoy the
interesting street scene while Zircon checked in.

The boys noted that many Moros were armed, with krises or barongs in
fancy sheaths. Some had small daggers with pistol-grip type handles
tucked in their sashes. While Rick and Scotty watched, they were on the
alert for possible enemies, but so many Moros eyed them curiously, it
was hard to pick out any one of them as being suspicious. Just the same,
both had the feeling of being tailed.

Zircon emerged shortly. "Lacson and Lim have both sent messages
transmitting what details we have. All detachments in the area have been
alerted to watch for the _Sampaguita_. Now they'll also be told to keep
a lookout for pirates or information concerning them. Our report on the
attack has gone to Manila already. They wasted no time."

The Spindrifters resumed their hike up the main street and came upon a
hard-goods store. Inside, Zircon finally succeeded in making his wants
known. To the boys' amazement, he bought ten dozen boxes of ordinary
household tacks! He refused to tell them what the tacks were for.

"He's going to nail down the facts," Rick suggested.

Scotty shook his head. "Nope. He thinks we have a sailboat, and anyone
knows sailboats have to tack into the wind."

Zircon merely grinned and said nothing.

Visits to four ship supply stores followed. Zircon expressed amazement
at the top of his voice that no timing gear was available. He bemoaned
the loss of one engine unless the gear was forthcoming. He sounded
pretty convincing.

"We've got it made," Scotty said with satisfaction as the three walked
back to the dock. "Did you know we have a tail? He's good, too. I had
trouble spotting him. You can bet he heard the professor's sad story,
which means the vintas will know about our 'bad engine.'"

The _Swift Arrow_ was in sight now. Rick stared for a heartbeat, then
broke into a run. "Come on! Chahda's fighting with someone!"

Rick had seen the Hindu boy dance into sight on the stern of the boat,
then lunge behind the pilot house again, a long knife in his hand.

The three pounded down the dock and leaped aboard, then stopped short at
the sight on the stern. Chahda had suspended a large bunch of bananas
from a convenient hook and was methodically slicing it to pieces with a
long Moro knife in each hand.

Rick exploded, "What in the name of an Indian idiot are you doing?"

Chahda paused in his dancing attack to welcome them aboard with a grin.
"I get in shape. You like my weapons?"

Rick and the others examined them with considerable interest. One was a
barong, with a heavy blade about two feet long. The blade curved along
the bottom, or cutting edge, but was nearly straight along the top,
which was nearly a quarter of an inch thick. The second weapon was a
kris, about the same length, but with two cutting edges, both of which
were wavy in typical kris fashion. The kris was more swordlike, but it
was a cutting weapon not used for stabbing.

Chahda proceeded to give a demonstration, a blade in each hand. Rick was
amazed to see that he used both hands equally well.

"Why all the sudden interest in weapons?" Rick asked.

Chahda sent the remainder of the bananas flying with one cut. "We go
after scientists, yes? We find them, too. But, Rick, don't think we get
them back without one big fight!"




CHAPTER X

South of Sulu


The _Swift Arrow_ rounded the western end of Jolo and headed south
toward the Tapul islands. On the south side of the group was the island
of Siasi where Zircon planned to top off the fuel tanks and check in
with the constabulary again.

The four set up watches, two to a watch, four hours at a stretch. They
settled down to a long search. At Siasi they would be at the center of
the Sulu Archipelago, and would leave the Sulu Sea behind and enter the
Celebes Sea. The sun blazed down from nearly overhead at noon until the
caulking in the deck bubbled and the sea seemed to steam. They were less
than six degrees above the Equator now.

Vintas dotted the waters close to the islands, but they were apparently
peaceful Samal fishermen. There was no sign of a pirate fleet.

"I doubt that the pirates will bother us in these waters," Zircon
remarked. "Too close to islands with civilization on them. We can look
for trouble in the more open waters to the south."

"They bothered us close to Zamboanga," Rick pointed out.

"True. However, I suspect it was simply a quick try at getting us before
we were well under way. I'm rather flattered, as a matter of fact. Of
course they know what we're after. It was in the Manila papers. But they
must realize we won't quit until we find Tony and Howard, and they must
be afraid we'll succeed. Otherwise, why attack us?"

Rick saw the sense of Zircon's reasoning. "Then this mysterious island
may not be hard to find, at least for anyone who's really determined."

"That's my guess. Anyway, I think we may be attacked when we
accidentally start toward their base. And it will be an accident, since
we have no clues."

At Siasi the constabulary had no further information of value, except
that the government was showing deep interest and concern about the
pirates. The searchers topped off the fuel and water tanks, and anchored
for the night in the protected harbor. At dawn they hauled anchor and
rounded Siasi.

Zircon laid a course that took them south-south-west toward the
Kinapusan Islands and cautioned all hands to be on the alert. By noon
they had crossed Taapan Passage.

Chahda and Rick were in the galley, cooking hamburgers for lunch. Chahda
was explaining the technique of using the Moro blades.

"Must remember, knife is not just a thing. Is part of your arm. Is
sharp part that just makes arm longer. You no swing knife. You swing
arm, like trying to cut with end of finger. Okay?"

"I get it," Rick agreed. "Don't think of the knife as something
separate. Think of it as part of your own body."

"Yes," Chahda assented. "Next, balancing of knife is important. If is
good, is like part of you. If is bad, can never be part of you. Moro
knives well-balanced. You see..."

Chahda never got a chance to finish.

"All hands on deck! Pirates!" Scotty yelled.

[Illustration: "_All hands on deck! Pirates!_"]

Rick and Chahda piled out of the galley at top speed, Rick grabbing
Shannon's quiver from its hook as he passed. He quickly put the bow
together and strung it, then swung the quiver to his back as he reached
the deck.

Ahead was a line of vintas, already curving in an arc to trap them. Rick
glanced behind and saw that other Moro craft were closing in. They would
be surrounded this time, unless they chose to give up their pretense of
a crippled engine.

"Chahda!" Scotty called. "Take the wheel so I can use my rifle."

The Hindu boy checked to be sure his knives were at hand, then took over
from Scotty, who laid out extra clips and got ready to fire.

Zircon had extra clips for his pistol close at hand. He was watching the
vintas through the long glass.

Rick put on his arm guard and finger protectors. Since the vintas were
still out of bowshot he took a moment to beeswax his string. Then he
took a small broadhead arrow from the quiver, nocked it, and drew a few
times to unlimber his muscles, being careful not to let the string snap
out of his fingers.

"What now?" he asked.

"We'll go straight ahead," Zircon answered. "Chahda, use nearly full
speed on one engine. Have the second engine idling, but don't use it
unless we get into serious trouble. Notice that the vintas ahead of us
are running before the wind? If we can get through the line we'll have
the weather gauge of them. In other words, they'll have to tack with the
wind against them. We'll be able to get free easily on one engine."

Scotty pointed to a gap between a vinta with a solid purple sail and one
with blue-and-white stripes. "There's a hole to go through, Chahda."

Rick saw that the vintas ahead were closing in. The Moro craft would be
two deep by the time the MTB reached them. He loosened his quiver and
made sure the arrows were free. He might have to shoot pretty fast.

His senses were unnaturally alert. The water was bluer than blue and the
small patches of fair-weather clouds seemed brilliantly white. The sails
on the Moro craft were gaudy, their crews properly fierce and
picturesque. He was detached from the reality of the scene, as though
this were some movie he was watching.

Zircon brought him back to reality with a jolt. "Pick off the helmsmen
first!"

Rick could hear yells now, as the Moros saw that the _Swift Arrow_ was
almost within reach. He ran to the foredeck and knelt on one knee, arrow
nocked and ready. Scotty climbed to the top of the pilothouse and lay
prone, rifle thrust out.

The pirate yells were louder now, and some Moros brandished barongs or
krises while others waved rifles. Rick suppressed a shudder. If the
pirates got on board with those knives ...

The pirate fleet opened fire. A slug whined off a ventilator cowl a foot
from Rick's head, but he forced himself to wait. It was still a little
far for bow shooting. It was not too far for Scotty, however. Rick heard
the sharp crack of his pal's rifle, and saw a Moro helmsman slump over
in the nearest vinta. The craft sheered off. Another Moro jumped to take
the helmsman's place and Scotty's second shot splintered the rudder
handle in his hands.

A vinta closed to within twenty yards, an easy bowshot. Rick mentally
timed the rise and fall of the craft on the swell. Then, as it broached
slightly, he had a clear shot at the helmsman. Kneeling, he drew swiftly
and loosed. The shaft caught the Moro in the hollow of the shoulder and
pinned him back against the stern transom.

Rick reached for another arrow in the smooth rhythm Shannon had taught
him, but the rhythm was abruptly shattered by a sudden blast almost in
his ear! He whirled swiftly to meet the new threat, just in time to see
Zircon open the breech of the saluting cannon and extract a smoking
shell.

For an instant Rick wondered if the scientist had taken leave of his
senses. He saw Zircon ram home a blank cartridge and close the breech.

Then, suddenly, the action made sense to Rick. For Zircon upended the
cannon muzzle and poured in a box of tacks!

The scientist depressed the muzzle, sighted calmly, and pulled the
lanyard. A swath of tacks spewed into the bow of the nearest vinta
bringing a chorus of pirate yells. The craft swerved away.

Shouting with delight at the scientist's ingenuity, Rick jumped to
Zircon's side. Working together, they fired box after box of tacks, and
saw the vintas slowly clear the way.

The Moros could face cold steel or hot lead without a qualm, but the
fierce, stinging tacks were too much, and too unexpected. They failed to
press the attack at the crucial moment and the _Swift Arrow_ slipped
through the line.

As Zircon had predicted, one engine gave them enough speed to get clear,
once the Moros had lost the advantage of a favorable wind. Scotty fired
a few more shots at the vintas within range, then dropped to the deck.
The fight was over.

The four gathered in the pilothouse and the three boys stared at Zircon
with mixed admiration and amusement.

"It's nothing," the big physicist said modestly. "You see, in my
lifetime I have been an avid reader. At one time, while at the
university, I read of some round-the-world traveler using tacks in a
signal gun. So I disclaim originality."

"My 'Worrold Alm-in-ack' not saying about this," Chahda said, grinning.
"Is pretty lucky you have good memory for other books, Professor!"

Rick looked back at the vintas, rapidly falling astern. The pirates were
well beyond gunshot now. "Victory at Sea," he proclaimed. "Thanks to the
professor's college education!"




CHAPTER XI

The Dancing Pirates


The _Swift Arrow_ rode at anchor in the gathering dusk, inside a snug
bay formed by a U-shaped island of the Kinapusan Group. The island was
very small, and uninhabited. It was surrounded by larger islands that
formed a kind of screen.

"Let's hope we can spend the night undisturbed," Zircon boomed as he
finished the last of his coffee. "I could use a good night's sleep."

"We all could," Rick agreed. He helped himself to more of the stew
Scotty had concocted. "Funny about a fight. That one was over in a few
minutes, but I feel as though I'd done a day's work at hard labor."

"A perfectly normal reaction," Zircon replied. "Our minds and bodies are
wonderful things. When we face danger our whole system goes into high
gear, our endocrines pumping fluids that get our bodies ready for fast
action, or for wounds. We operate at top physical efficiency. Then, when
the danger is past and our minds signal that it's time to get back to
normal, we show the effects of our overstimulation by a kind of
lassitude."

That was true, Rick knew from his own experience. It seemed that he was
always scared stiff before a fight, cool as could be during it, and limp
as boiled lettuce when it was over.

Zircon changed the subject. "Scotty, when you first spotted the pirates,
from what direction were they coming?"

The boy thought it over. "From about due south," he said at last. "But
when they spotted us the line shifted to the east, on an interception
course. They came from south originally, though."

"Not from southwest?" Zircon persisted.

"No. If anything, it was a little east of south, not west."

"Uhuh. That was my impression, but I wanted to be sure. Now, according
to the chart, most of the scattered islands of the Tawi Tawi Group lie
more westerly than south of here. If the pirates came from due south, it
means they swung wide to miss the inhabited islands."

Chahda asked, "What means this to you, sir?"

"I'm not sure. I think it means we had better search the seas to the
eastward of the main Tawi Tawi chain. The pirates would certainly have
come from a westerly direction if their headquarters were anywhere near
Tawi Tawi."

The big scientist rose. "I don't know about the rest of you, but I'm for
bed. Who has the first watch?"

"I'm on the eight-to-midnight," Rick replied. "It's after eight now, so
I'll stand by. Chahda relieves me at twelve, you come on at four, and
Scotty finishes the night."

They had arranged the anchor watches that way because a single guard
would be enough while at anchor, and it would allow each of them a good
night's sleep.

Zircon and Chahda retired at once, but Scotty lingered. The two sat on
the afterdeck and watched the stars for a few moments.

"How are we doing?" Scotty asked quietly.

Rick knew what he meant. "I'm scared," he said. "It's a big ocean, and
we could miss easily. Also, I'm thinking about what Chahda said. Even if
we find Shan, we won't get Tony and Shannon back without a fight. There
must be hundreds of pirates, if the fleets we've seen are a sample." He
was sure that the northern attack had been made by a different group
than the one that attacked earlier in the day.

"Do you think they're still alive?" Scotty asked.

"We have to assume they are. What else can we do?"

"Nothing," Scotty replied sensibly. "Except say our prayers faithfully."

"Amen," Rick said. "Go on to bed. You must be tired."

"I am. See you in the morning."

After Scotty had gone below, Rick sat quietly, depending more on ears
than eyes to keep watch. Again and again he reviewed every bit of
information they had obtained, re-examining it to see if any nugget of
value might have been overlooked. At last he decided they had done
everything possible. The rest would be persistence, and luck.

His thoughts turned to home, and he wondered what his folks were doing.
It was nine o'clock, Manila time. At Spindrift it was eight this
morning. The family would be gathering for breakfast, and Barby would be
slipping Dismal, the family pup, scraps of bacon under the table.

Rick resolved to send a cable from Tawi Tawi, if they should stop there.
He knew the family would be anxious to know how things were going.

The watch ticked away without incident. A few minutes before midnight
Rick woke Chahda and joined the Hindu boy in a glass of cold coke. Then
he went to bed and drifted off to sleep immediately.

Some inner instinct awakened him. For a moment he lay quietly, his heart
pounding, eyes blinking in the darkness. Then he heard the pad of bare
feet as Scotty got to his feet.

"What's up?" Rick whispered.

"Just restless, I guess," Scotty whispered back.

Rick was wide awake now. He slipped into shoes and trousers while Scotty
did the same. A few minutes in the cool air on deck would make him
sleepy again, he thought.

"On deck!" Chahda gave a wild yell. "Come quick!" The words were
punctuated by gunfire.

Instantly Zircon leaped to his feet and ran for the door.

Rick emerged into the lesser darkness of the deck in time to see Chahda
fire at moving shapes on the water. The Hindu boy's shot was answered by
a dozen rifles, and Rick heard Chahda gasp.

"Pirates!" Chahda yelled. "Where is light?"

For answer, Scotty switched on the boat's searchlight and swiveled it.
Rick shouted. A dozen vintas were closing rapidly, propelled by paddles.
Fleetingly he thought that some sound or sense of danger must have
awakened him, then he grabbed for Shannon's bow, realized in the same
instant that it would do little good in the darkness, and put it back.

Zircon took the pistol from Chahda while Scotty found his rifle. The two
started a steady fire that was returned in ragged volleys as the pirates
tried to shoot out the light. They came close, but the light stood
undamaged. Rick thanked his guardian angel that they were poor shots.

It was obvious that even pistol and rifle fire could not keep the
pirates from boarding. Rick jumped to the controls and started the
engines. If they could only slip the anchor, it might be possible to ram
through the pirate craft and find safety in the open water. But even as
he borrowed Chahda's kris and started to run to the bow to cut the
anchor rope, the first vinta slammed into the torpedo boat.

Dark figures swarmed up the sides with piercing yells. Rick ran to meet
them, swinging the kris.

He realized vaguely that the pirate yells had turned somehow to screams
that seemed anguished, but his thoughts were occupied only with getting
the Moros off the deck. In the faint scattered light at the side of the
searchlight beam he saw that they were dancing, wildly, like Indians in
a TV horse opera!

Scotty joined him in the wild rush up the deck and the two boys hit the
Moros at the same instant. Rick swung the kris like a flail, while the
butt of Scotty's rifle slammed into bodies and heads.

The Moros turned with one accord and went over the side!

Zircon yelled, "Another boat back here!"

But Rick and Scotty had troubles of their own. Moros were pouring onto
the deck from the bow, where another vinta had tied up to the anchor
rope. They ran to meet the new attack, and were astonished to see the
pirates go into the same screaming dance. Then they were fighting again,
Rick wielding the kris with deadly effect, too frantic even to wonder
why the Moros weren't fighting more fiercely.

From the stern came a wild yell from Zircon, a great bellow that had
overtones of pain. Rick's breath caught. Had the big scientist gone
down?

But the bellowing roar continued and he knew Zircon was still alive.
Rick could do nothing at the moment anyway, except to swing the kris
until his arm felt as though the muscles were on fire. Next to him,
Scotty slammed home a butt stroke that lifted a pirate high off his feet
and threw him outward into the water. It was an instant before Rick
realized the deck was clear, then he turned and ran to the stern while
Scotty reversed his rifle and shot the vinta clear of pirates in the
glare from the searchlight. From the corner of his eye Rick could see
the Moros from the bow vinta scuttling through the water toward other
boats, and toward land.

At the stern Zircon towered like a mighty champion of mythology. Rick
saw him lift a pirate bodily, pluck the barong from his hand, and throw
him against two other pirates. At the scientist's side Chahda fought
valiantly with his left hand, his flying barong glittering in the
scattered back light of the searchlight. By the time Rick reached his
friends the deck was clear.

Chahda ran and swiveled the searchlight, and Rick saw that the vintas
were pulling away, amidst yells of rage from the pirates. Up on the bow,
Scotty was shooting as fast as he could aim and pull trigger, with
pauses only to slap a fresh clip into the rifle. The return fire
continued, but without order or enthusiasm, and in a few moments it
stopped altogether.

"They're gone," Rick said with relief. "Is anyone hurt?"

"Little bit," the Hindu boy answered. "When is time, maybe could use
bandage."

Scotty joined the three on the stern. "I'll get the first-aid kit.
Professor, are you hurt?"

"Like fire," Zircon answered grimly. "I'll never be the same again." He
sank down on a convenient seat and began to examine his feet. "But let's
get out of here and attend to Chahda when we're under way. They may
attack again, if they can find shoes."

The comment baffled Rick, but he didn't stop to question. He hurried
forward to pull in the anchor, and found a vinta still attached to the
rope. For a moment he debated about cutting it loose, then realized that
it would only be picked up by the pirates and used against them. He
untied the vinta line from the anchor rope and temporarily hitched it to
a bitt while he hauled in the anchor.

The vinta was light and easy to tow. He hauled it to the stern of the
MTB and attached the line to a cleat. Scotty was already at the wheel.

"Go!" Rick commanded.

Scotty shot the searchlight beam toward the entrance to the harbor and
put the engines in gear. The MTB moved with gathering speed, following
the clear path indicated by the searchlight. Once the light picked up a
vinta, but off to one side. Scotty gave it a wide berth.

As they cleared the bay, Rick got the first-aid kit and took Chahda down
into the cabin. The Hindu boy's shoulder was covered with blood. Rick
hurriedly cut way the clothes, afraid of what he might find. Zircon
joined him, watching anxiously.

"Is not bad," Chahda said. "Just made me stop fighting for a few
minutes."

Rick saw that the boy was right. A bullet had creased his right
shoulder, digging a deep furrow from which the blood welled. It was
painful, but at least they weren't faced with the problem of getting the
bullet out. He sterilized the wound and bound it tightly with gauze
pads. Then he washed Chahda clean of blood and put him to bed with a
blanket over him in case of shock.

"How about you, Professor?" Rick asked. "You said something about being
wounded, but I don't see any blood."

Zircon chuckled grimly. "Not much blood, anyway. How did you happen to
be wearing shoes?"

Rick explained that he and Scotty had awakened before the attack and had
gotten partially dressed to go on deck.

"Then you don't know," Zircon said. Suddenly he put his head back and
roared with laughter. "Did you ever see anything weirder than those
pirates dancing? I thought they'd gone insane in wholesale lots!"

Rick stared at the scientist. "I noticed," he said. "I wondered about
it, too."

"But you don't know the reason!" Zircon pointed at Chahda, who grinned
weakly from his bunk. "There's the cause of it all. He routed the enemy
with minimum help from us, even after he was wounded."

Rick turned to stare at Chahda. "What's he talking about?"

The Hindu boy shook his head. "I was sleepy, and I afraid maybe fall
asleep, which big disgrace. So what I do? I fix things to hurt pirates,
but also I hurt Professor Zircon, for which I plenty sorry."

"But how?" Rick demanded.

"Oh, I remembered that in Jolo I never see Moros wear shoes. Not very
many, anyway."

Zircon had mentioned shoes, too. Rick groaned with impatience. "What
have shoes to do with it?"

Chahda grinned. "I borrow the professor's cannon ammunition. All around
edge of deck I sprinkled, so when pirates come, they dance, and soon
they have plenty."

Rick got it then. He sat down and laughed until Scotty had to stick his
head in to see what was going on.

Rick pointed at Chahda. "The Hindu wizard!" he roared. "You know what he
did? He sprinkled the deck with tacks! No wonder the pirates danced!"




CHAPTER XII

Search the Wide Seas


There was an atmosphere of rising excitement on the _Swift Arrow_. Rick
felt it, and knew the others did, too. Little by little they were
narrowing the search. With only a few island groups remaining, he felt
sure it would not be long before the pirate stronghold was located.

The _Swift Arrow_ had poked its sharp bow into nearly every port in the
vast Tawi Tawi Group, and had put into the port of Dungun on the main
island to refuel. Since the pirate attack of two nights before, the
Spindrifters had practically eliminated the Tawi Tawi islands as
possibilities for the pirate hideout.

Hobart Zircon, checking their progress on the chart, called the boys
together.

"There's only one island group remaining in this immediate area," Zircon
pointed out, "and I'm not even sure it's in Philippines waters."

Rick studied the place on the chart indicated by the big scientist.
There were only three tiny islands in the Datu Amman Group.

"They're pretty far to the southeast," Rick commented. "Just about on
the border of Indonesia and the Philippines. Do we head for them next?"

Zircon poked a big finger at the chart. "I think we'd better. Then, if
we find nothing, we can head southwest toward Sibutu Island."

"These Datu Amman islands aren't very big," Rick pointed out. "But
that's the general direction from which the pirates have been coming. We
have to eliminate every island in this area before going on to Sibutu
and Borneo."

"We've got full tanks," Scotty observed. "Might as well get started."

"I think this also," Chahda agreed. "We not miss any islands. Besides,
these far out of way, not on ship lanes. Could be good place for
pirates."

"My thoughts exactly," Zircon stated. "Who has the wheel?...
Chahda?... All right. Head southeast, and I'll plot a course."

"Why not use both engines?" Rick suggested. "Then we can get there
before dark. If nothing turns up, we can travel all night from there to
Sibutu. It's all open water."

"If we use both engines, someone had better keep watch from on top of
the pilothouse," Scotty added. "Then, if we see vintas, we can throttle
down. That way, we won't have to give up our disguise of being a partial
cripple."

"Good idea," Zircon approved. "Suppose you start, Scotty? Rick can
relieve you later."

Rick grinned. "That's what you get for having ideas. Tell you what,
I'll toss you. Heads I take the first watch topside, tails I'll start
making lunch."

"Sold." Scotty produced a centavo and they flipped. Rick won and climbed
to the top of the pilothouse while Scotty went below to prepare
sandwiches.

Rick sat in a canvas chair Zircon handed up to him and watched the sea,
now and then sweeping the horizon with Shannon's long glass. The _Swift
Arrow_ cut the water cleanly, with both engines roaring at
three-quarters throttle.

They were cruising the Celebes Sea now, the Sulu Archipelago rapidly
falling astern. It was a calm, clear day without even a single whitecap
to mar the blue perfection of the sea. Now and then a school of flying
fish broke water from under the MTB's bow, and twice Rick spotted
sharks, one of them a hammerhead. There were no vintas in sight.

Zircon handed up sandwiches and coffee, then relieved Chahda at the
wheel. The Hindu boy's shoulder was healing nicely, but it was still a
little stiff and he was careful not to move his arm more than necessary
for fear of breaking open the wound.

The afternoon wore on without sign of a sail. Scotty relieved Rick, who
relaxed on the afterdeck. The boy glanced at his watch. They should be
picking up the islands soon.

Suddenly Scotty sang out, "Sail ho."

"How many?" Rick called.

"Just one. On the horizon, off the port bow."

Rick relieved Chahda at the helm, and the Hindu boy hurried below,
saying that he wanted a cold drink before the fight started. Rick
watched for the vinta sail, but before the craft was visible from his
lower vantage point, Scotty called out again. "Land! Behind the vinta.
Looks like a coral atoll. I can see the tips of palms."

Zircon checked the chart. "It should be the most westerly of the three
islands," the physicist reported. "Scotty, any more vintas?"

"Just the one."

"Head for the island," Zircon instructed Rick. "We'll want a close
look."

Chahda emerged from the galley with cold cokes for all hands, and they
drank while waiting for the boat to get within examination distance of
the island. It was clearly visible within a short time. As Scotty had
said, it was a coral atoll, the highest point not more than ten feet
above sea level.

They passed the vinta at a distance of a hundred yards. There were only
three men aboard, and they were fishing. Then Rick cut closer to the
island while Scotty kept a sharp lookout for shoal waters and coral
heads.

Details were clearly visible now. There were a dozen huts on the island,
and only a handful of people were visible. Zircon took the long glass
from Scotty and inspected carefully, "Apparently it's a small fishing
community. I see nets, and another three vintas pulled up on shore.
There seems to be ... Wait!"

Rick watched as the scientist swung the long glass into the air,
followed something for a moment, then lowered it, his face grim.

"I caught a glimpse of a man releasing something into the air, and
managed to pick it up with the glass. It was a pigeon. And you know what
that means!"

The boys did. "Which way did it go?" Rick asked.

"Due east."

Rick swung the MTB onto an easterly course without another word. He knew
from the chart that the biggest island of the three in the Datu Amman
Group lay that way. The third island was about ten miles to the north.
Release of the carrier pigeon could mean only that the island they were
now passing was a lookout position, from which the people on the biggest
island had now been notified of their arrival. And that meant ... what?
Rick had a good idea, which inspection should soon prove!

"Land ho!" Scotty called down. "It's a peak of some sort."

Rick saw it a few moments later, a golden glitter on the ocean as the
fast-setting sun struck land.

The four watched as the land mass slowly took shape. "It's a mountain,
all right," Zircon said, excitement in his booming voice. "Looks like a
volcanic cone. Can you see it clearly, Scotty?"

"It's a cone, and not much land under it, either. Hey! Vintas ahead!
Must be a hundred of them!"

Rick felt excitement surge through him. That was too many vintas for a
simple fishing community on an island of small size!

"They're forming a line between us and the island!" Scotty called down a
moment later.

Rick could make out the tips of sails, and as the _Swift Arrow_ forged
ahead, the entire fleet slowly came into view. Scotty was right. The
vintas were in a line--like a planned defense!

The island was almost entirely visible, now. A volcanic cone, perhaps
five hundred feet high, formed most of the island. From the base of the
cone, flat land spread out toward the oncoming MTB, ending in a white
beach.

"Get within gunshot of the vintas," Zircon directed grimly. "Let's see
if they're really hostile. If they are, we'll know we've found
something. And forget the crippled engine disguise. It's served its
purpose."

Rick figured his course carefully. He would take the MTB on a gradually
sweeping curve that would place them within gunshot, but in a position
to beat a fast retreat. In a few minutes, now, they would be in
position. He kept his fingers crossed. Things looked promising. If this
were only the end of the search.

He throttled back a little, in order to keep a good amount of speed in
reserve, and kept the MTB on the course he had planned, sweeping toward
one end of the vinta line. He saw the outrigger craft back their sails
as they turned to intercept him. Then, as the long curve brought him
within rifle range he put the helm hard over, running broadside to the
line of bright sails.

Scotty called, "Watch it! Heads down!" The boy was flat on the top of
the pilothouse now, his own rifle within reach.

As an echo to his warning Chahda yelled, "They shoot!"

Rick couldn't hear the shots above the engine roar, but he took Chahda's
word for it. He put the helm over again, turning the stern toward the
line of boats.

Scotty jumped to the deck. "They took several shots at us, but none hit.
I saw the muzzle flashes."

Zircon nodded. "I saw muzzle flashes, too. Lads, it looks as though
we've really found something, including a mountain. Now, I suggest we
reconnoiter thoroughly."

"What's your plan?" Rick asked.

"Circle the island completely, at close range. Swing wide, to approach
from the north, then go around the island clockwise, staying as close to
shore as safety allows. We can outrun the vintas without trouble. If
necessary, we can even cut inside the line for a close look." The big
physicist was almost trembling with excitement.

Rick wasted no time in swinging north, away from the vintas. Scotty went
back to the top of the pilothouse to watch for shoal waters. Once he was
far beyond the line of vintas, Rick cut back again, pointing the bow of
the MTB at the northern shore of the island. He took out his
handkerchief to wipe palms that were suddenly damp with nervous
perspiration. This had to be the place!

He could see now that the volcanic peak occupied the entire eastern part
of the island. It dropped steeply into the ocean on both the eastern and
northern shores. The inhabitable land area was a broad shelf that sloped
from the base of the volcano to the western shore.

As the MTB plowed toward the island more details became visible. There
was a very small crescent of beach on the northern shore, but black
volcanic rock dropped into the sea in most places.

"Let's see what the rest of this place looks like," Zircon directed.

Rick put the MTB on a curving course that would take them completely
around the island, about a hundred yards offshore. They left the
northern coast and passed the eastern edge of the island. Surf broke on
the black volcanic rock on the eastern shore, except at one point where
there appeared to be a fair-sized cove.

The southern shore was equally forbidding until the volcanic cone was
passed. There was a large cove where the land shelf met the volcano.
Docks could be seen, and a few vintas. Apparently this was the island's
boat anchorage.

Zircon nodded his satisfaction. "We seem to have something here, boys.
It's an ideal spot for a pirate stronghold. Notice they didn't try to
follow us, or cut us off anywhere except on the west? That's because the
island is a natural fortress, except for the western land slope. They
need only look for trouble from the west."

The MTB was in sight of the pirate fleet again. They were still in a
battle array to protect the vulnerable western shore. The line of vintas
formed a long curve from a point just off the pirate anchorage around
the western shore to where the volcano rose from the land shelf on the
north.

"I'll stay out of rifleshot," Rick said. "Take a look at the village
through the long glass, Professor. There may be some sign of Shannon and
Tony."

"I'm not hopeful about that," Zircon replied. "They'd be under cover."

The pirates made no move to follow the MTB on its curving course around
their battle line. Apparently the vintas were holding position in a
planned defense. Across the vinta line, Rick could see a field of what
appeared to be grain, separated by a street from a field of what was
certainly corn. The village itself was of nipa shacks on stilts, all of
them located near the volcano. There were a few trees, mostly mango and
avocado.

"Plenty room for plenty pirates," Chahda commented.

Rick grinned mirthlessly. "You're so right." The village would provide
housing for three or four hundred, anyway.

"No sign of volcanic activity," Scotty said. "It must be a dead volcano.
Anyway, I don't think even pirates would be foolish enough to live under
a live one."

"You're right," Zircon agreed. He waved a hand at the island. "Does
anyone doubt that this is the right place?"

No one did.

"I not seeing scientists," Chahda observed.

"They wouldn't be in the open, anyway. But did anyone see their boat?"

"All boats were vintas," Rick replied.

"I thought so, too. However, I wouldn't expect the pirates to keep the
_Sampaguita_ in sight. Head back toward Tawi Tawi, Rick. We've plans to
make!"

Rick returned the scientist's jubilant grin, then he turned to look back
at the rapidly receding pirate island, the volcano black and forbidding
in the gathering dusk.

"We'll be back," he promised the invisible scientists. "We'll be back!"




CHAPTER XIII

The Two Datus


The _Swift Arrow_ moved slowly through the darkness toward the Tawi Tawi
Group. Chahda was at the helm, while Rick, Scotty, and Zircon held a
council of war in the cabin. The Hindu boy kept popping in and out,
letting the MTB travel with locked rudder for a few minutes at a time so
he could be in on the conference.

"It has to be Shan," Rick said flatly. "No fishing village ever had that
many vintas. And no peaceful fishermen ever fired on a stranger the way
that mob fired on us. Besides, there's a mountain."

"I agree." Zircon examined his pistol barrel carefully, then ran a
cleaning rag through it again. "Furthermore, those vintas operated in a
planned defense, in a way no fishermen would ever do. I'm convinced that
it is the right island. The problem now is, what do we do?"

Scotty paused in reassembling his rifle after a thorough cleaning. "Is
there a choice? We can't rush the village and rescue our friends, even
if we knew where they were. We'll have to get the constabulary, and the
Philippines Naval Patrol, and mount an all-out assault on the place."

"No!" Rick exclaimed. "We can't do that. If the pirates saw an armed
fleet approaching, they'd kill Tony and Shannon, and get rid of their
bodies. The fleet would find nothing at all."

Chahda asked in quick alarm, "You think they kill scientists when we
come today?"

"I doubt it," Rick explained. "After all, one boat isn't a threat to
them, even a fast one like this one. I think they'd only get rid of Tony
and Shannon if they saw they were going to be invaded."

"Then what can we do?" Scotty asked.

"I'm not sure. Anyway, the first thing is to see if our friends are
really there. When we get some more facts, maybe we can work out a
plan."

Zircon nodded. "That's sensible. The question is, how can we reconnoiter
the island? Circling it in the boat again will only tell us what we
already know."

"Only one way. We go look," Chahda pointed out.

Rick knew the Hindu boy was right. But getting ashore presented
problems. If the MTB got within swimming distance, the pirates would see
it. Of course they could row ashore by night in the rubber life raft the
big boat carried. He suggested it to the others.

Chahda leaped at the idea. "Silent boat is good, Rick, but not rubber
boat. You remember we still got vinta?"

"Of course!" Rick saw that Chahda had hit on the answer. They had left
the captured vinta in a small cove on the shore of an uninhabited island
a few miles to the north. "We can get it and tow it to easy sailing
distance. The pirates won't think anything of a single vinta even if
they see it. There must be boats coming and going all the time."

"That is what I think too." Chahda ran back to the helm.

"Won't they recognize the vinta?" Scotty asked, then answered his own
question, "I guess not. I've seen a dozen sails like it, and the hull
looks like all the rest."

"The plan might work," Zircon agreed. "We'll try it. First we get the
vinta, then head south. By morning we'll be far out in the open sea. We
can then make a wide circle and approach the island from the east. They
won't expect us from that direction. Besides, only the western shore was
guarded, so far as I could see."

Rick had a picture in his mind of the strip of isolated beach on the
northern shore. If they could land there, no one would see them. Then
they could climb over the stretch of lava between the beach and the
land, or swim around to the point where the land began.

"I know the place," he volunteered, and told the others his idea,
repeating it for Chahda's benefit as the boy reappeared at the cabin
door.

Zircon thought it over. "It should work, unless they have a lookout
posted at each side of the island. But we can't know that until we try.
Frankly, I doubt it. I think they believe the island is safe on all
sides except the west. Now, who will go on this reconnaissance?"

"Rick and me," Chahda said firmly.

"I'm going," Scotty stated.

Zircon held up his hand. "Wait. Chahda, from your tone of voice, you
have a reason. What is it?"

"Plenty reason. This small island, so who goes ashore will be seen, I
think. So, must be in Moro clothes. Professor, you and Scotty not good
size for Moro. You too big, and Scotty has too wide shoulders. Rick is
maybe a little tall, but not so wide. He can maybe stoop a little. Me, I
perfect for Moro. Even same color."

"You're right," Zircon agreed. "No question of it. So curb your
impatience, Scotty. Your turn will come and so will mine. Chahda, you
take the lead in figuring out disguises for you and Rick. Scotty, you
and I will take over the watch and get underway."

       *       *       *       *       *

By morning the _Swift Arrow_, with the vinta in tow, was in Indonesian
waters far from shipping lanes or fishing grounds. Zircon figured their
position as 120 degrees 29 minutes longitude, and 4 degrees 21 seconds
latitude. They had seen no sails for hours.

The MTB was allowed to drift while the group went about the business of
making ready. Chahda had created a Moro cap for Rick from a piece of
upholstery he had cut from a seat bottom. Rick had cut the seams in a
pair of white duck trousers and laced them with twine from the rope
locker until they fitted as tightly as Moro pants. One of his own
shirts, dirtied up a little and left open at the collar, would complete
his outfit.

Chahda cut one of his extra turbans in half and made sashes for both of
them, and modified the wrapping of his own turban so that it was more
like the flat Moro variety.

The only real problem was Rick's color. In spite of his deep tan he
couldn't possibly pass for a Moro. He and Chahda searched the boat for
something that would serve as a stain, then finally took their problem
to the others.

Scotty had the answer. With a broad grin he went to his suitcase and
drew out a can of brown shoe polish. "Neatness pays," he proclaimed. He
passed it to Chahda with a flourish. "Don't give him too high a gloss
when you polish him."

"How about shoes?" Zircon asked. "The polish reminded me. The pirates
don't wear any."

"This pirate does," Rick declared. "I'll rub the shine off, but I can't
go barefoot."

"Also," Chahda agreed. "Foots too tender. We could not run or fight in
barefoots."

When everything was in readiness except for the application of polish,
Rick and Chahda took time to eat, then got into the vinta and began
practicing.

The craft was filthy, from years of accumulated dirt and no cleaning,
and it offended Rick's nose. But more than that, it was hard to handle.
He could sail in conventional craft, but the outrigger design had its
own peculiarities.

Slowly, as the day wore on, the two boys learned the Moro craft's ways
until they could handle it fairly well. There were paddles, in case the
wind failed, and Rick thought they might end up using the paddles,
anyway.

As they tied up after the last practice run Zircon called them to eat,
then instructed them to get some sleep. None of the four had slept more
than an hour at a time since the previous morning, but the big scientist
and Scotty had decided to handle the MTB themselves on the way to the
pirate island, so Rick and Chahda could be fresh for the night's
adventure.

After a meal of hot soup and crackers, the two boys climbed into their
bunks and drifted off to sleep. Zircon and Scotty had already started
the run toward Shan.

Rick awoke with Scotty shaking him. "Time to rise, old son."

The boy swung to the deck. "Where are we?"

"About five miles east of the island." Scotty shook Chahda and told the
Hindu boy it was time to get up, then he sat down next to Rick. "I feel
funny, not going with you. Maybe I'd better go along. I could stay in
the vinta, and be ready in case of trouble."

Rick gave his pal a sympathetic grin. He knew how Scotty felt. "Look at
it this way. If Chahda and I get caught, that leaves only you and
Zircon. And you couldn't give up, even with us out of the picture."

"I guess so." Scotty gave in reluctantly. "Come on. Coffee and
sandwiches waiting. I'll go topside and help the professor keep a
lookout."

Rick and Chahda got into their outfits, then the Hindu boy carefully
rubbed in polish on Rick's face, neck, arms, and hands, and his chest
where it showed through the open shirt.

Finally the Hindu boy stood back and admired his handiwork. "Plenty
good. You make fine Moro, Rick."

Rick adjusted Chahda's kris in his sash. "So are you. You'd fool the
Sultan of Sulu himself."

"We be two Datus," Chahda said, grinning. "Datu Rick and Datu Chahda."

"What's this date business?" Scotty asked as he came down from the
pilothouse.

"Is Datu, not date. Datu is what Moros call Chiefs. We Datus."

"Okay, Datus. The professor wants a look at you. I'll go take the wheel
while he comes down. We're blacked out topside, just in case there's a
lookout on this side of the island."

In a moment Zircon came down and inspected them carefully. "You'd never
pass in daylight, Rick," he said finally. "But at night there should be
no trouble unless someone gives you a close inspection--in which case
you'd be caught, anyway. Now, have some coffee and sandwiches while
Scotty and I move the boat in closer."

Rick said doubtfully, "Isn't it dangerous to get too close?"

Chahda chimed in. "In 'Worrold Alm-in-ack,' says can see pretty far at
sea. Volcano is maybe five hundred feet. Man on top can maybe see 25.6
ocean miles, says 'Alm-in-ack.'"

"True." Zircon smiled. "But that would be in daylight, with absolutely
clear visibility. You recall that we didn't see the island yesterday
until we were perhaps ten miles away? Water vapor in the air cuts down
visibility here, and at night of course it's even less. If we're blacked
out, I think we can get within two miles with safety. Fortunately, the
moon set shortly after sunset. So our principal problem will be guessing
how far away we can be heard. At low speed, on only one engine, I think
two miles will be safe."

The professor had been figuring things out, Rick realized. He nodded
approval. "All right. We'll be ready by the time you're in position.
I'll leave my Megabuck unit on the boat, and we'll depend on Chahda's.
Then, if we get caught, you and Scotty will still have two sets."

"You won't get caught," Zircon stated emphatically. "Don't even
entertain the idea. I'm sure you can outrun the pirates. If you're
spotted, call us, then get to the shore. We'll come roaring in. Also, I
want you to take the pistol and extra clips. Then, if need be, you can
hold off the mob for the few minutes it will take us to get there."

"All right." Rick didn't really believe they would be caught. Chahda
was an expert at reconnoitering, and he had had plenty of experience
himself. Besides, it was good to be moving into action, no matter what
the danger. They had searched for a long time. Now, their missing
friends were within reach. He had to believe that because the
alternative was to think they were dead.

"Let's eat, Chahda," he said. "Almost time to go."




CHAPTER XIV

The High Fire


The Celebes Sea was dark, with a low swell but no chop. There was just
enough wind to fill the vinta's sail, which suited Rick. At this stage
in the proceedings he was more concerned about silence and safety than
speed. Zircon and Scotty had moved another mile seaward as soon as the
vinta was launched. That was to avoid anyone on the island hearing the
engines in case a sudden onshore wind came up.

Up ahead, Chahda was a dark blur against the sail, trimming it for
maximum efficiency. Presently the Hindu boy came back to the tiller and
sat down near Rick.

Shan's volcanic cone blotted out the stars ahead. There were no lights
of any kind on the mountain itself, and the number of lights in the
village was gradually diminishing.

The water splashed a little under the rudder, and the cordage holding
the mast and sail creaked as a vagrant breeze caught the vinta.
Otherwise, there was no sound. Once a fish jumped nearby, and Rick was
halfway to his feet, hand going to the pistol at his belt, before he
realized what it was. He smiled at his own tenseness.

Rick wiped moist palms on the thighs of his tight pants and strained to
see the first sign of the beach on which he and Chahda would land.
Chahda, according to plan, moved to the bow of the Moro craft in order
to keep a lookout.

The timing was all right, Rick thought. There were still lights in the
village, but not many. Early, when too many pirates were out of doors,
would not be a good time. Later, when perhaps only guards were moving
around, would be even worse. They had tried to time their reconnaissance
for an in-between period, and it looked as though the selection of the
hour was good. Most villagers were in bed, but enough kerosene lamps and
candles burned to show that the two of them probably would not attract
special attention by being out so late.

Chahda came back and whispered, "We drop sail now."

"Okay." Rick was careful to keep his voice at a whisper. He knew sound
carried across the water.

The boys let the sail down and lashed it just enough to keep a sudden
breeze from tangling the lines, then took paddles and steered for the
small crescent of beach that made a light streak between the sea and the
black rock of the volcano. The lights of the village were gradually lost
as the jutting rock between the beach and the western land slope blocked
their view.

Rick and Chahda timed their paddle strokes to catch a low wave as it
sped to shore, and in a moment the vinta's bow grated on sand. Chahda
jumped to shore, carrying the craft's anchor--a block of stone with a
hole in it for the rope--and hauled the vinta's bow up on dry coral
sand. Rick stepped to the sand and paused, ears tuned for any unusual
noise. He heard nothing except the sharp barking of a dog in the
village.

"If this is like most Asiatic villages, there'll be enough mutts to make
it a dog catcher's paradise," he whispered in Chahda's ear. "They'll
give us away sure!"

Chahda shook his head. "Leave to me. Have plenty sad experience with
dogs. I come ready for them."

Rick wondered how the Hindu boy was prepared, but he realized this was
no time for questions. He put his lips close to the hidden radio unit
under Chahda's turban and called softly, "Rick to home base."

"Go ahead, Rick," Zircon's voice said faintly through the heavy folds of
turban.

"We're on the beach, about to leave the vinta."

"Good luck. We're standing by for a fast run if needed. Be careful."

"We will," Rick promised. "Off for now." He drew the automatic from his
sash, pulled back the slide, and let it carry a round into the chamber.
Then he lowered the hammer to half cock and made sure the safety was on.
He tucked the pistol into his sash, and loosened the kris in its
sheath.

Chahda drew his barong and made a few practice swings. The blade gleamed
in the starlight.

Rick led the way, westward along the beach to where the black lava rock
lay in tumbled masses. If they could climb across the tongue of lava,
all would be well. If not, they would have to return to the beach and
swim around it.

The lava was in big chunks, and there were ample hand and footholds. It
was an easy climb to the top of the flow, only about twenty feet above
sea level, and an easy climb down again. The only hard part was moving
across the top of the flow, through the mass of lava boulders.

Presently the two boys stood on soil, still hidden among lava
outcroppings. The village was to their left. In front of them, to the
west, was a cornfield. Rick wasn't surprised to see the corn. He knew
that from the central Philippines south to Sulu there was more corn
eaten than rice.

"Keep an eye open for a guard," he whispered to Chahda. "We'll wait a
few minutes to see if one shows up. Then, if it seems clear, we'll move
along the edge of the cornfield toward the village."

"Good plan," Chahda agreed.

Rick strained to catch sound or motion. When his luminous watch dial
told him five minutes had elapsed, he leaned toward Chahda. "No sign of
a guard. Let's go."

Apparently the pirates were sure attack could come only from the west,
as Zircon had thought.

Undoubtedly they had lookouts on the western shore.

Rick led the way, keeping close to the abrupt rise of the volcanic cone.
He saw there were plenty of gaps and holes in the lava into which they
could duck, as well as the cornfield. Knowing they could be out of sight
in a matter of seconds gave him confidence, and he moved rapidly ahead.

A slight breeze brought him the scent--or rather stench--of the village.
He wrinkled his nose and suppressed a sneeze. Wow! If the pirates
possessed any virtues, cleanliness was not one of them.

The cornfield ran right up to the edge of the village, which was nestled
under a point where the volcano dropped steeply for perhaps a hundred
feet. It was a good defensive position, Rick saw. The black lava cliff
probably could be climbed, and would offer a wonderful location for
riflemen. Even heavy weapons would have a hard time dislodging them.

Ahead was a kind of street, a wide gap between rows of houses. Some of
the houses showed the yellow flickering light of candles or kerosene
lamps, but most were dark. The houses were raised up on piles, in the
fashion common throughout the Philippines, and most of them offered
little obstruction to the view.

Rick shrank back as a man walked down the street, turned, and went up a
ladder into one of the houses. In the dim light Rick could see that he
had tight pants, a flat turban, and a rifle in his hand. The boy
shuddered. There probably were enough deadly weapons in the village to
outfit a regimental combat team. One slip and those weapons would be
turned on them.

Chahda put his lips close to Rick's ear. "What we do now?"

"Look for a house with guards, I guess."

It seemed the only possibility. If Tony and Shannon were in the village,
they would almost certainly be guarded. Guards probably would be the
only clue to their presence.

For long moments Rick debated on how best to approach the problem. There
wasn't any easy way. He tapped Chahda on the shoulder. "Let's go."

The two boys stepped out from their concealment against the volcanic
wall and walked boldly into the village.

Rick had his fingers crossed for luck, but he was ready to uncross them
in a hurry and go for the pistol in his sash. Their disguises had to
protect them from casual viewers. He had confidence that the deep
shadows of the village would conceal the fact that they were strangers,
unless they came face to face with someone.

The street paralleled the face of the volcano, with houses on both
sides. For the first few steps they saw no one, then far down the street
a Moro crossed, and it took all of Rick's courage to keep walking
casually ahead.

Nearby a dog barked, and the noise sent a stream of sweat dripping down
Rick's back. The barking continued, drew nearer. Rick half drew his
kris, but Chahda whispered hoarsely, "Wait!"

A mongrel of indiscriminate breed sidled up to them, hackles raised,
teeth gleaming faintly in a snarl. Chahda bent low and murmured. The dog
leaped frantically, and Rick's heart caught in his throat. Then the
Hindu boy miraculously was petting the vicious mutt.

"What did you do?" Rick demanded in a whisper.

"You remember canned hombargers? I open can and put some in my pocket.
Feed one to dog. He our friend now. Come on."

Rick had to grin. The mysterious Hindu! Behind the mystery was a
practical solution to problems. Just stick a couple of "hombargers" in
the pocket.

The boy led the way again, Chahda hurrying to catch up. Beside them, the
once-fierce dog gamboled like a puppy, hoping for another handout.

In a few moments Rick saw that the two streets of the town formed a huge
T, with the stem starting under the mountain and running toward the
west. He had an idea that Tony and Shannon would be near the center of
the village, in the most protected position--simply because it would be
easier to guard them that way. That meant they would be close to the
intersection where he and Chahda now stood.

A poke in the ribs from Chahda took his mind off the problem in a hurry,
and put it on a new and immediate one. A man was walking directly
toward them, coming from the direction of the western shore. Rick
couldn't see him clearly; it was too dark in the village. But he could
see enough to know that the pirate carried a rifle and had a barong
tucked into his belt.

Rick's hand started for the pistol, then paused. He couldn't shoot now.
It would bring the whole village down on them. For a moment he nearly
panicked, then with a nod to Chahda he walked directly toward the man.
The bold approach was the best one, he figured. To run was to bring a
shot. He had a vague idea of getting within range, then jumping the
Moro. Certainly they couldn't stop and talk with him; neither of them
knew the language.

The pirate didn't seem uncertain, or alarmed. He walked toward the two
boys casually, obviously not yet recognizing them as strangers. He would
soon, Rick knew. It was important to get the jump on the Moro first, and
prevent him yelling, if possible.

Then, as Rick prepared for a wild spring and a roundhouse punch, Chahda
whispered, "Be ready," and lifted his hand in salute. The Moro lifted
his hand, too, and said something in the native tongue. It might have
been a greeting; neither boy ever knew for sure.

Chahda walked right up to him, muttering something that was probably
Hindu double talk. The Indian boy moved so that the Moro swung around,
trying to understand what Chahda was saying.

For an instant the pirate's back was to Rick. He moved like a charging
panther. The pistol came out of his sash and descended barrel first, all
his desperate strength behind it. He felt it slam down on the pirate's
turban and connect solidly with the head underneath.

Chahda caught the man as he fell, and in an instant the two boys had
hauled him under the nearest house.

Rick found the man's pulse and breathed an inaudible sigh of relief. It
was thready and slow, but it was there. The pirate would wake up, but
not for some time. The dog sniffed inquiringly at the fallen Moro, but
made no noise. Rick took Chahda by the arm and pulled him out into the
street again, pausing anxiously to see if the brief and violent meeting
had attracted attention. Apparently it hadn't. There were no signs of
life in nearby houses, and no one looked out of those with lights
farther along the street.

Rick decided they had better conduct their search with all possible
speed. The boys moved rapidly along the street at the top of the T,
toward the waterfront on the south. The dog trotted alongside, their
firm friend now. Rick knew the boat dock must be at the end of the
street. That would certainly mean guards, and it wouldn't be wise to go
too close.

He had a sudden thought that the scientists might be prisoners on one of
the vintas, then rejected it. No vinta they had seen was big enough to
serve as a prison, and there had been no sign of the boat the missing
men had rented. That could also mean the scientists weren't even on the
island. But if not, where could they be?

Chahda's hand on his arm stopped Rick. He saw that they had nearly
completed their inspection of this particular street. The masts of
vintas and the sheen of water among the pirate craft were visible
directly ahead.

He put his lips close to Chahda's ear and whispered, "Let's cut west,
through the houses."

Rick's idea was to go through the quadrant of town they were now
traversing, until he saw the waterfront on the west. Then they could
cross the street that he pictured as the stem of the "T" and turn back
toward the mountain, going through the town on the other side. That way,
if any trouble developed, they would be only a few yards from the
cornfield, and could certainly lose themselves until Zircon and Scotty
could come roaring in.

They passed under a lighted house, and through the split bamboo floor
laths they could see two men drinking _basi_, or some other native
beverage, from sections of bamboo. Now and then the two men talked in
casual, drowsy tones.

Nowhere was there a sign of guards until Rick and Chahda passed
completely through the village and emerged under the great branches of a
mango tree. Ahead of them was a field of grain, probably millet, and
beyond it was the western shore of the island. As they watched, two men
walked along the shore toward each other, met, chatted for a moment,
then turned and walked away from each other again.

"Guards," Rick said softly. "Walking their patrols along the beach."

It was as he suspected. The two guards, patrolling the beach, could see
everything that offered danger by walking from where they had met to
points roughly halfway around the island.

"Maybe they see us in the vinta," Chahda whispered. "But maybe they no
think much about it."

Rick thought he might be right, but the greater probability was that
they hadn't been seen at all, especially if they had approached the
shore while the guards were walking toward each other near the western
end of the island.

"We'll be a little more cautious on the way back," Rick returned softly.

"Is so," Chahda agreed. "What we do now?"

Rick motioned toward the street that led from the volcano to the western
shore. "Cross that and look at the houses on the other side. Come on."

With a quick look around to be sure no one was watching, or showing any
undue interest in them, he moved out from the shadow of the mango tree
and headed past the irregularly placed houses to where the wide strip of
yellow dust marked the street.

They reached the street's edge without incident, and paused for another
quick look before crossing. As Rick glanced up the street a flicker of
yellow high in the air caught his eye. He lifted his head and stared
directly at it. A fire! It was high up on the face of the cliff behind
the village, where they couldn't have seen it from the street under the
cliff.

He wondered. Was it a beacon for pirates who might be out in the vintas?
Apparently it was on a shelf of some sort more than a hundred feet above
the village.

Then, as he watched, a tall, thin figure passed in front of the fire and
was silhouetted briefly against the flames.

He grabbed for Chahda. That was no Moro, not with those long legs and
arms! And no Moro on this island would wear thick glasses, from which
the firelight had glinted momentarily.

That was Howard Shannon!




CHAPTER XV

Plan of Attack


The boys crossed the street, crept past several houses, and gained the
safety of the cornfield. Slowly, so that rustling leaves and stalks
would not give them away, they crossed the cornfield. To Rick, at least,
it was a terribly long and slow journey. He wanted to give a yell of joy
and triumph. He wanted to call Zircon immediately and pass on the good
news. But he knew silence was important, and he kept his exultation
locked inside.

As they reached the lava flow Chahda gave the now-faithful pirate dog
the last of his hamburgers, and the boys climbed across the lava to the
beach. Only then did Rick dare to stop long enough to call the _Swift
Arrow_.

"We found Shannon," he said triumphantly. "Now we have to get out of
here. We'll give you the details later."

The boys pushed off in the vinta and paddled toward the east in order to
get farther away from the guards before putting up the sail. Then,
because the slight breeze had shifted, it was necessary to tack the
cranky craft until dawn was pale in the east before they reached the
_Swift Arrow_.

As the MTB moved quietly south, out of danger, Rick reported. "We saw
Shannon, as I told you on the radio. I'm sure it was he. They're on the
cliff at the back of the village. I'd guess the shelf where we saw the
fire is over a hundred feet up."

"No sign of Briotti?" Zircon asked.

"None at all. Of course we couldn't see onto the shelf. There wasn't
enough light and it was too high."

Scotty rubbed his chin. "How did they get up there?"

"Must be ladder," Chahda answered.

"A pretty good prison," Zircon commented. "No danger of escape, once the
ladder or steps were removed, and the whole village serves as guard. The
big question is, how do we get them out of there?"

Rick had thought about it during the tedious trip back. He had turned
over every possibility in his mind and eliminated all but one. What's
more, he wasn't sure that would work.

"I have an idea," he explained, "but it depends on a daytime look at the
island."

Zircon nodded. "All right. We'll take a look. Now, tell us about the
village. Any trouble?"

The two boys gave Zircon and Scotty a quick account of their
reconnaissance, and both chuckled at Chahda's trick of feeding the dog.

"He'll probably be standing on the beach waiting when you get back,"
Scotty said with a grin. "Bet it's the first hamburger the pooch ever
had. That pirate you belted with the pistol bothers me, though. Won't he
set off an alarm that will put the whole mob on the alert?"

"I hope not. There's a chance he might think it was someone in the
village who has a grudge against him."

Zircon shrugged. "One way or another, there's nothing we can do about it
now. We'll have to assume the whole place is alerted."

"How about some sleep?" Scotty suggested.

Rick shook his head. The first part of his plan had to be put into
operation immediately. "It's only a little while to dawn. By sunrise we
have to be east of the island."

He explained quickly. For a safe, undetected look at the areas of the
island he wanted to see, they would have to depend on the sun for a
shield. They could proceed immediately on a roundabout course that would
bring them to the east of the island just as the sun was rising. Hidden
in the sun's glare, they would have a few minutes in which to examine
the eastern slope of the volcano.

"I'm beginning to see your plan," Zircon said. "Then what?"

"Then we go into safe waters for the day. At sunset we hide in the sun
again, while we look at the island from the west. We'll wait until the
sun is low enough, so no one on the island will be looking into it, then
we'll use it for a shield and take a good look at Shannon's cliff
dwelling through the long glass."

Scotty shook his head. "But we already know what's on the eastern and
western shores. Why go to all this trouble?"

"We don't know much about the terrain. If it looks possible, you and I
go climbing tonight. We land on the eastern shore, climb the volcano, go
over the top and down the western side until we come out right above the
shelf where the scientists are held prisoner. Then we haul them up on a
rope."

Scotty stared at his pal. "Wow! We take them out by the back door, huh?"

Zircon held up his hand. "Not so fast. The plan is a good one, Rick. I
won't mention my natural dislike of being dismissed from the scheme
without being consulted, because you and Scotty are the logical ones to
go for a reconnaissance of this kind. But I'll buy only this: You and
Scotty will look over the terrain tonight. If possible, you will deliver
a Megabuck radio unit to Shannon and Briotti. Then you will return
without attracting attention. That will be time enough for us to plan
the rescue, in conjunction with our friends on the cliff."

Rick had to admit Zircon's plan made better sense, even though he
disliked the idea of another day's delay in rescuing their friends. He
nodded.

Scotty rose, his pleasure at the plan evident in his wide grin. "Let's
go!"

Fifteen hours later the _Swift Arrow_ withdrew to the open waters to the
south as the sun slowly fell below the horizon. The four adventurers
gathered around the chart table and studied the island of Shan,
comparing notes.

Zircon used a pair of dividers as a pointer. "This cove on the eastern
shore looks like the best possibility for anchoring the vinta, and I'd
say the climb up the volcano from there is no harder than from any other
place."

Rick agreed. "It looked that way to me, too. We'll call that cove our
back door. The only real puzzle is, does the volcano have a crater? If
so, we'll have to go around it. Climbing down into the crater and up
again would use up too much time."

Zircon shrugged. "We have no way of telling. Did anyone notice a
preferred way around the cone?"

"The southern slope looks a little less steep," Scotty volunteered.

Chahda nodded agreement. "I also think this. To me, big trouble is place
right above cliff. Is pretty steep, I think."

The Hindu boy was right as usual, Rick thought. He had seen through the
long glass that the area above the steep cliff was only slightly less
vertical than the cliff itself, with an occasional shelf of rock. Not
only would that be the hardest part of the trip, he guessed, but the
most dangerous, since they would be in sight of the village part of the
time.

"It's steep," Scotty agreed. "I'd say it's not a place to pick for a
casual stroll, but I can't think of any other way to get our friends off
that shelf. Can you?"

The others shook their heads. They had discussed it at length during the
daylight hours while they floated patiently in the waters south of Shan,
alternately sleeping and preparing for the night's work. Since no other
plan seemed even remotely feasible, Rick and Scotty were to make the
first try in about two hours.

The time passed swiftly with last-minute preparations. The boys carried
rope, heavy spikes to be used as pitons on particularly difficult
places, flashlights taped so only a pinpoint of light could emerge, cans
of water from the emergency rations, work gloves from the clothing
locker, and candy bars for quick-energy rations.

In addition, Rick had Zircon's pistol, a takedown fishing rod, with reel
and line, a radio unit, and the long glass. Scotty had his rifle, a
small first-aid kit, and a wooden caulking mallet.

The two boys were having a last cup of coffee when Chahda came down from
the upper deck. "Is time," the Hindu boy told them. "We two miles east
of Shan. Good wind. You make good time going in, not so good coming
back."

The boys finished their coffee and went on deck. The four shook hands
all around, and Zircon cautioned, "Give yourselves plenty of time for
the return trip. Remember that if you're late, you'll have to hide on
the volcano all day!"




CHAPTER XVI

The Black Cliff


Heavy seas broke against the rocky base of the island. Rick surveyed the
cove they had chosen with some misgiving. The vinta wouldn't be safe if
tied to shore. The breaking surf would batter it to bits before they
could get back.

Scotty moved to his side. "Now what?"

"Swim," Rick said grimly. "Around that point looks like the most
sheltered place, but it isn't good. The wind blows these waves halfway
around the world, and they've got plenty of steam."

"Have to chance it," Scotty stated.

They maneuvered the cranky craft into the meager shelter of the point
Rick had indicated, then dropped the stone anchor. It dragged along the
bottom briefly, then caught in a cleft between two underwater rocks. It
would hold unless the rope broke.

The boys took their belongings and bundled them in their clothes, along
with shoes and weapons. Then, holding the bundles high with one hand,
they slipped into the water. In a few moments the two were rubbing
themselves dry and putting their clothes on again.

Rick tried the radio unit while they rested. "Rick to Zircon."

"Standing by, Rick. Where are you?"

"Ashore." He described the situation briefly.

"I should have thought of that," Zircon replied. "The eastern shore is
to windward. You were bound to have surf. Are you all right?"

"Yes. We're starting out now. We'll talk to you from on top, if it's
safe." He hung the little radio around his neck by its lanyard, and
stood up. "Ready to climb Mount Everest, brother Scott?"

Scotty stared up at the slope of the volcano. "If you are, brother
Brant."

Neither boy was an experienced mountaineer, but both knew the principles
of operation. They roped together and started the long climb. It was
easy at first. The slopes low down were not steep, and the broken lava
gave plenty of hand and footholds. But as they reached a point Rick
estimated to be about two hundred feet above the water, the slope
steepened sharply.

"Rest a moment," Scotty suggested. "We'll last longer if we take a
breather once in a while."

Rick knew Scotty was right, but he resented the need for sitting idly
for even a few minutes. He used the five-minute rest period to report to
Zircon that all was well.

Rick led the way again as soon as the luminous dial of his wrist watch
showed that five minutes had elapsed. Twice he and Scotty were stalled
for a brief time, but finally found a route and improved it by hammering
the steel spikes in clefts in the rock. With the hammer padded, the
sound was muffled to a point where it couldn't be heard more than a few
feet away. The spikes could be used to belay their rope on the way down.

The last stage of the upward journey was to the top of the cone. It was
nearly vertical, but wide cracks made it less difficult than some of the
areas below. Scotty was leading now. He reached the top, then waited for
Rick to join him.

Silently the two boys looked out over the dark sea, and Rick wished for
a moment that he could see the view by daylight.

"Let's check the crater," Scotty suggested. He drew his flashlight, then
inched forward across the rubble of the rim. Rick stayed beside him.

"Any danger of the beam being seen?" Scotty asked softly.

"No. The angle is wrong. If you keep it directed toward the crater, it
will be invisible from the sea."

Rick watched as Scotty switched the light on. The pencil of light swept
downward, and finally lost itself in nothingness.

The two boys stared at each other.

"The whole island's hollow!" Rick breathed. "I'll say this thing has a
crater!"

"Plenty deep," Scotty agreed. "Well, that tears it. Nothing to do but go
around. You lead the way."

Rick felt his way down until at last he was standing on the shoulder of
the ancient volcano just below the final sweep upward to the crest. In a
moment Scotty joined him. Slowly and carefully they started the long
journey around, taking the southern slope as previously agreed.

It was hard going. In spots the lava was crumbly and gave under foot or
hand. In others it was dense as steel slag.

When Rick estimated that over half the distance around the volcano had
been covered he called Zircon and reported, then told the big scientist
it would be their last contact for a while.

Within a hundred feet the lights of the village came in sight far below.
The boys paused to survey the situation, and to examine the western part
of the island. Most of it was visible from their vantage point. Only the
cove where the vintas were kept and the section of village closest to
the cliff were out of sight. Rick could see the beach clearly, and
wondered if the guards were looking their way.

"Go carefully," Scotty whispered. "This is no time to start a
landslide."

"Good advice," Rick whispered back. "But which way do we go now?"

"The slope to the left looks pretty good," Scotty answered softly. "We
can cut back when we get down a little."

At the bottom of the slope, they found another drift that angled away
toward the north. By the time they reached the bottom of it, Rick
whispered that they must be directly above the cave. He could see the
lighter path of the street that ran from below the shelf toward the
western end of the island. Now all that remained was to make their way
down to within reach of the scientists.

They moved with extreme caution, fearful that the slightest noise would
give them away, or that a wrong step would start a rockslide. It was
painful work, going down backward most of the way. Once they reached
what seemed to be a dead end, and lay on their stomachs surveying a
sheer wall nearly twelve feet high.

Rick solved the problem by finding a lava boulder big enough and stable
enough to serve as a rope anchor. They took an extra length of line
Scotty carried and made it fast, then went down the rope hand over hand.

The whole village was spread before them now. Rick could even see the
cross street that ran below the base of the cliff, and he knew they must
be nearly within sight of the shelf on which the scientists were
imprisoned.

"Tough section below," Scotty whispered so low that Rick could barely
hear him. "I think it drops off sheer."

Another dozen feet of slow progress proved that Scotty was right. There
was a small shelf, then the slope dropped away abruptly. Both boys lay
flat, and slowly inched up to the drop and looked over.

Rick felt Scotty's hand grip his arm like an iron clamp at the same
moment that he realized that another shelf was directly below, a tiny
campfire burning on it!

But that wasn't what Scotty had seen. At a point off to their right, and
only slightly below them was a second, smaller shelf. On it sat a pirate
guard, rifle across his knees, staring out to sea.

Rick swallowed his heart, which had climbed into his throat. They were
in plain sight of the guard, or at least their heads were. He backed
away as rapidly as the rough surface allowed, until the guard was no
longer in sight. He and Scotty held a whispered exchange, their voices
no louder than a zephyr.

"Keep your eyes off him," Rick said. "He may feel someone looking at
him."

"Right. He's in a wonderful position. He looks down on the shelf where
the fire is located. Did you see the ladder?"

Rick hadn't.

"It leads from his perch to the shelf. I suppose ladders lead down to
the ground from there."

The guard was an obstacle Rick hadn't expected. He wondered if the guard
on duty last night had seen him slug the pirate, and he decided it
didn't make much difference. As Zircon had said, they had to assume the
whole colony was alerted.

"Let's look out one at a time," he whispered. "I didn't see anyone on
the ledge."

He inched forward once more and put his head over the edge of the drop.
The fire on the rocky shelf was a small one, probably only a cooking
fire. There wasn't anyone in sight. He guessed the scientists must be
in a cave under the rock on which he crouched. He could only hope they
were awake.

Rick estimated the situation. It was perhaps thirty feet down to the
shelf. The guard was ten feet below, and twenty feet to his right. He
noticed that the guard didn't look down at the shelf. He was awake, but
his attention was focused outward. In all probability he was a lookout
rather than a guard, watching for signs of ship movement to the west,
the direction from which danger to the pirates might be expected to
come.

The boy withdrew and joined Scotty. "No sign of anyone on the shelf. I'm
going to lower the radio unit, anyway."

"Okay. Let's get the rod out."

Rick had carried the rod-section case on his back, tied to shoulders and
belt with line. He untied the line swiftly and assembled the rod. Scotty
helped him put the reel in place and feed the line through the guides.
Then Rick carefully wrapped the radio unit in his handkerchief, and put
the whole thing in a black denim ditty bag borrowed from Chahda for the
purpose. He secured the drawstring of the ditty bag to the end of the
fishing line and inched forward again. Scotty moved forward, too, his
rifle unslung and ready for action.

Rick hadn't even bothered with a note. Both Shannon and Briotti would
recognize the radio unit instantly. There were no others like it outside
of Spindrift. They would immediately put it to use and be talking to
Zircon before the two boys had moved away from the position over their
heads.

Carefully Rick pushed the tip of the rod out far enough so the ditty bag
would clear all obstructions on the way down, then he swung the bag
clear and began to feed out the line.

The bag went down an inch at a time, while he concentrated on keeping
the motion slow but steady. A sudden jerk might attract the guard's
attention, but very slow motion probably wouldn't.

[Illustration: _A sudden jerk would attract the guard's attention_]

He was sweating profusely by the time the bag got within reach of the
shelf below. He began to worry. He had seen no one. Had the pirates
removed the scientists, leaving the lookout in his usual position?

He kept the bag moving until suddenly strain went off the line and he
knew it was down. He could see it in the faint glow from the fire, lying
motion-less on the rock below. Long moments ticked by and he felt the
trickle of sweat down his face, the sweat of apprehension. Why didn't
someone show up?

And then, as though in answer to the frantic thought, a man stepped into
view below, and casually dropped his coat over the ditty bag.

Rick almost sobbed with relief. Tony Briotti! The familiar crew cut had
grown long, but it was Tony!

Swiftly the boy drew his knife and cut the line, letting the loose end
tumble down. Then, careful of the fishing rod, he withdrew from the edge
and touched Scotty to indicate he should withdraw, too.

For a few seconds they just lay there, weak with relief. Then Rick
disassembled the rod and restowed it. Scotty reslung his rifle. On hands
and knees, the two started their retreat. Not until they were certain
that the guard could no longer see them did they stand upright and begin
to move more rapidly.

Their mission was a success, but perhaps the plan was not. Rick was no
longer filled with enthusiasm for his scheme. The guard had changed all
that.

How were they going to get the scientists out with a guard watching
them?




CHAPTER XVII

The Radio Link


Dawn was showing its first pale light in the east when Rick and Scotty
tied the vinta at the stern of the _Swift Arrow_ and climbed aboard.
Hobart Zircon and Chahda greeted them with relief.

"We thinking you lost or caught," Chahda said happily. "Glad we wrong."

Zircon added, "We were about to make a run toward shore, hoping to see
you."

"It was the wind," Scotty said wearily. "We had to beat to windward all
the way back. Did you ever try tacking a vinta for hours against a stiff
breeze?"

Rick slumped down on a convenient bench. "Save the talk for later. We'd
better get out of here. It's nearly daylight."

"You're right!" Zircon hurried to the controls and headed the _Swift
Arrow_ south. Gradually he opened the throttles until, at a safe
distance from the island, the MTB was moving at full-cruising speed.
Only then did the four take time to talk.

"Any radio contact?" Rick demanded.

Zircon's wide grin answered him.

"Are they all right?" Scotty yelled.

"Yes. Want to say hello?"

Rick jumped for the radio unit the scientist held out, and plugged in
the earphone. Scotty took Chahda's set.

"Rick and Scotty here," Rick called. "Do you hear us?"

Tony Briotti's familiar voice answered. "Rick and Scotty! You two young
cliff hangers! What took you so long to get back? Zircon kept us posted,
and we were worried sick. We kept watching the village, expecting you to
be hauled in as prisoners."

Rick explained about the unfavorable wind, and Scotty added, "Besides,
we took it easy crossing the volcano. We hammered spikes in a few rough
places to make it easier when we come back for you."

"You can't," Tony said swiftly. "Boys, believe me, we're grateful for
the attempt, but you can't get away with it. There's a lookout in
position to see us at all times, and there's no way you can sneak up on
him. I've told Zircon this. You must not try!"

"How is Dr. Shannon?" Rick asked.

"Fine. We're all fine, although we could use a bath and some home
cooking. But don't try to change the subject, Rick. You must not try to
get us out of here. You'd end up in this prison, if not dead."

Rick could see that the conversation was leading nowhere, and he knew
now that the scientists were all right. "We're tired, Tony," he said
wearily. "It's been a rough night."

"All right, boys. One of us will be awake at all times, so call us
whenever you wish."

Zircon looked at them anxiously as they put the radio units away. "How
about it? Is Tony right?"

"Right as radishes," Rick assented. "The lookout is where we can't reach
him, except with a gun, and the noise of a shot would defeat us. I'm
sure there's some way out of this, but I can't think straight. I'm too
tired."

"Below and into your bunks, both of you," Zircon commanded. "Chahda and
I will stand by until we're in safe waters, then we can all get some
sleep."

Rick needed no second invitation. He was asleep in five minutes. Hours
later a ray of sun through the porthole woke him out of deep, dreamless
slumber. He stretched luxuriously. A wash and a cold drink would be just
right, he decided, and wondered how long he had been asleep. His watch
told him it was two thirty in the afternoon.

He got to his feet and saw that Scotty was out of his bunk, probably on
deck. Chahda was sleeping quietly, even though the swinging quiver Rick
had placed on a hook near the bunk struck him in the elbow every time
the boat rolled.

Rick lifted the quiver down and started to hang it where Chahda wouldn't
be bothered. He paused, brows furrowed. He had the answer to their
problem in his hands. An arrow was silent.

He shook his head and put the quiver away. It would mean putting a
hunting arrow through the guard's head without warning. He knew
perfectly well he was incapable of killing a man in cold blood, no
matter what the provocation. It would be an easy shot, but one he would
never make.

Zircon and Scotty were relaxed on deck when Rick joined them after a
quick shower. They greeted him soberly.

"Did you dream the right answer?" Scotty asked.

"Didn't dream at all," he retorted. "I've had only one idea, and it
won't do." He told them about the bow.

Zircon smiled understandingly. "I quite agree, Rick. I couldn't do it
either, even if I had the skill." He changed the subject. "I talked with
Howard while you were sleeping. He agrees with Tony. We must not make
the try."

"Let's not give up," Scotty pleaded. "We haven't explored every possible
idea."

"True," Zircon agreed. "Rick, you don't know all that Tony and Howard
told us. It seems there was a reason behind their kidnaping after all."

"What?"

"Yes. Remember the missing Filipino boy from Manila? Elpidio Torres?
Seems he's a young naturalist. He ran away from home to join Shannon and
Briotti when he read of their expedition in the papers. And how do you
suppose he did it?"

The light dawned. "Of course! The young Moro guide!" Rick exclaimed. "I
get it now. The pirates weren't after our boys at all. They were after
the Torres kid. Only to get him, they had to grab Briotti and Shannon,
too!"

"Exactly right. Tony and Howard didn't even know who he was. They hired
him in good faith. Then, when the pirates showed up in the Bagobo
village, they tried to defend the boy and got taken, too. They were
brought here in the rented sailboat, along with the Torres boy. The
sailboat was repainted and taken into Indonesia to be sold. Now, Tony
says, the pirates are getting restless. If the ransom for the Torres boy
isn't forthcoming in a few days, they may all vanish for good."

Rick swallowed hard. There must be a way to get that guard! He looked at
Scotty. "Could you bean that lookout with a stone from a sling?"

Scotty shook his head. "Angle and range are wrong. I might be lucky, but
I might not. If not, there goes the ball game. Of course I could make a
sling easily enough."

The boys referred to the ancient variety of sling, rather than the
modern slingshot. Both were adept in its use, although Scotty was the
better shot.

Scotty continued, "Why does a bowshot have to be lethal? You've got some
blunt arrows."

The moment the words "blunt arrows" were spoken Rick's mind went into
high gear. The arrows in the quiver wouldn't do; at that range, with so
powerful a bow, even a blunt arrow in the head would kill. But if he
could somehow give the arrow a broader and blunter head, so the impact
would be spread over a greater area, it could stun without killing.

"Professor, get the details on when the lookout is changed and anything
else that might be useful," Rick said quickly. "I think I've got an idea
that will work, thanks to Scotty's comment."

He hurried below, went forward, and rummaged around in the rope locker.
He moved to the paint locker and examined everything within reach. There
was nothing suitable. Disappointed, he went on deck and examined the
superstructure. A wooden barrel plug would be ideal, but they didn't
have a barrel aboard. There was only a fifty-gallon steel drum used as a
spare fuel supply. If worst came to worst, he could fashion a head from
a piece of the fender board. Then his eyes suddenly fell on the
flagstaff astern and he let out a yell of delight.

Scotty and Zircon watched as he unshipped the staff from its holder and
pulled it down. It had a gilded sphere about the size of a baseball on
top. Rick tested it anxiously. It was glued tightly.

"Scotty!" Zircon bellowed. "There's a saw in the tool chest, and I
believe I saw a brace and bits."

Both Scotty and Zircon had seen instantly what Rick was after. The
large, smooth ball would spread the arrow's impact over a greater area.
Scotty returned in a moment with the tools, and sawed the ball off. Then
Rick got a blunt arrow from the quiver and cut the metal tip off with
his knife. He bored a hole of the proper size in the base of the ball.
The arrow fitted perfectly.

Rick tested the balance of the now-ungainly arrow and shook his head.
"I'm not sure I can hit anything with it."

"Get the bow!" Zircon commanded. "Scotty, put a screw through the base
of the ball to hold it on the shaft. I'm going to rig a backstop so Rick
can practice."

The scientist found a tarpaulin and strung it up like a curtain across
the stern. At the center of the tarpaulin he pinned a work glove.

Rick studied the setup. The canvas would give, absorbing the shock of
the arrow and allowing it to fall on deck. It would be all right. He
didn't want to chance losing the ball.

He consulted with Scotty, and they paced off the approximate distance he
would have to shoot, then he climbed on the pilothouse roof to get the
proper elevation. Spreading the bow a few times to loosen his muscles,
he began to practice.

The arrow was terribly nose heavy, and its whole response to the bow was
changed. At first he missed by two or three feet. Then, as he continued
to practice, his accuracy began to improve.

He stopped after a while and had a coke. "I'll never be able to shoot a
normal arrow again," he complained.

Scotty grinned. "Make this shot and you'll never have to shoot again."

By the time Chahda emerged, rubbing sleep from his eyes, Rick was on
target. Four out of five shots hit the glove. Then, nine out of ten were
in the palm.

Zircon called a halt, took the glove from the tarp, and slipped it on.
He tucked a folded handkerchief into the glove, then stood with hand
outstretched before the tarp. "Hit it," he invited.

"I'll hurt you," Rick objected.

"No. My hand will give with the arrow. I want an idea of the impact."

Rick nodded. He nocked the arrow, took a firm stance, and drew. For an
instant he held, then loosed smoothly.

The ball smacked into the scientist's hand. The scientist swung lightly
with the blow and stood grinning, the ball and its projecting shaft held
firmly in his hand.

"A real beanball," Zircon boomed. "It will do, Rick. Now check your
equipment and put it away. We have to make plans."

Rick realized the professor had chosen an apt simile when he said
beanball. Like a fast ball hurled by a big-league pitcher, the arrow
could be caught in the hand, but would knock for a loop anyone it hit in
the head. Now all he had to do was shoot straight just one time.

Zircon gathered the boys around him. "Tony says the lookout changes at
sundown, and again sometime near dawn. So, if we make our try as soon
after dark as possible, we'll have until dawn to return. And this time,
there will be no beating to windward with the vinta. We'll take it in as
you did last night. But when it's time to leave, Chahda will come after
us in the big boat. Meanwhile, we say nothing to Tony and Howard. We'll
explain after we've landed."

The Hindu boy looked pained. "I not go?"

Zircon put a hand gently on the boy's wounded shoulder. "You can't climb
without opening that shoulder, Chahda. So you're elected to operate the
boat. You'll keep your own radio set and we'll call you in when we're
ready to be taken off. And when we call, come a-running!"

"That I will do," Chahda promised.

"Right. Now, from your description of the climb, boys, I think we need a
few rope ladders. Let's get started making them!"




CHAPTER XVIII

Under Cover of Darkness


Hobart Zircon's usually booming voice couldn't have been heard more than
two yards away as he spoke into the tiny Megabuck radio unit.

"We're starting down the western slope of the volcano. How are things,
Tony?"

Rick and Scotty, their ears close to the tiny earphone Zircon held out,
heard Briotti's reply. The kidnaped scientists had given up trying to
dissuade them.

"Everything normal, Hobart. The lookout is settling down now. He's one
of the regulars. He relaxes completely as a sleeping cat, but he's wide
awake. Don't let his appearance deceive you."

"We won't," Zircon promised. "We'll call you again as we get into the
danger zone. Chahda?"

The Hindu boy answered instantly. "Here."

"Fine. Keep listening and you'll know how we're doing."

"Will do. Tell Rick shoot straight."

Rick grinned. It was good advice. Nevertheless, apprehension had kept
him in a sweat. He had never before been in a position where success or
failure--and probably all their lives--hung on a single shot.

Scotty put a reassuring hand on his shoulder. "This is just another
shot, old son. You've made far tougher ones on the course back home."

"He's right." Hobart Zircon added. "You showed this afternoon that you
could hit a small target with that unwieldy club you invented. Let's
go."

Scotty took the lead, following the route he and Rick had explored the
night before. Rick followed close on his heels, and Zircon brought up
the rear. In spite of his bulk, the scientist was light-footed and
silent.

They reached a point where the boys had tied a rope to a boulder the
night before and now they paused to attach the rope ladder Rick carried.
It was one of four they had fashioned. Two already had been placed.
Zircon carried the last one. Scotty went down first, with Zircon
following cautiously.

The ropes creaked, but held. Zircon stepped to firm ground and Rick
followed down the ladder. They negotiated a bend in the trail, then
Scotty stopped and held up his hand.

Rick took Shannon's bow from the quiver. While he was getting ready,
Zircon made a last check with Tony and Chahda. When Rick signaled,
Scotty led the way down the last few dozen yards of steep lava to the
final shelf.

There, just out of sight of the guard, Scotty unslung his rifle. The
dark-haired boy went forward and peered over the edge of rock that
shielded them. For a long moment he surveyed the scene below, then
backed away. Rick caught his gesture. It was time.

He had planned how he would do this. He couldn't shoot in a lying-down
position, and kneeling would expose him to the guard just as surely as
standing upright would do--if the guard happened to be looking. So, he
would shoot while standing erect. His accuracy would be better that way.

Rick fitted the arrow's nock to the bowstring, got his fingers in
position to draw, and flexed the bow slightly. Then, taking a deep
breath, he stepped calmly forward to the edge of rock.

It took only three steps to bring him within sight of the guard. He had
a quick vision of a black velvet cap, hunched shoulders, and a rifle
held casually across the knees. He drew smoothly, held for the briefest
instant, and released the shaft.

Scotty was at his side, rifle ready, the moment the shaft left the bow.

It wasn't necessary. Rick had an instant's impression of sound, like a
baseball slapping into a catcher's mitt. The guard didn't even move from
his position. His shoulders slumped a little more and his head went
forward between his knees. He stayed that way. The arrow skittered
across the stone shelf and stopped.

Rick knew his aim had been a little off. The ball had caught the guard
behind the ear, instead of directly in the back of the head. Cold sweat
bathed the boy at the nearness of it. He had almost missed!

But there wasn't time to think about that now. Scotty and Zircon were
already moving into action. The big scientist unwound the rope ladder
from around his waist while Scotty drove spikes into a cleft in the
lava. His wooden mallet, muffled with cloth padding, made only a dull,
almost inaudible sound.

Zircon secured the end of the ladder to the spikes, then put his weight
on it, testing. It held. He moved forward, and lowered the free end over
the cliff.

Rick and Scotty stood by to give a hand to the men on the ledge below.
They were already on their way, Howard Shannon first.

Rick eyed the village anxiously. He was sure they were practically
invisible against the dark lava, but he wouldn't feel secure until they
had moved out of sight.

Shannon reached the top, and Rick and Scotty helped him over. A Filipino
boy was next up, and Rick knew this must be the famous Elpidio Torres.
The boy came up the ladder like a sailor and scrambled over the top
without help.

Tony Briotti was last. The youthful archaeologist wasted no time in
swarming up the ladder to the top, and in a moment the six of them were
shaking hands in silent glee.

Scotty pulled the ladder up, so it wouldn't be seen dangling, then
whispered urgently, "Let's get going."

By prearrangement, Scotty led the way with Zircon next in line, followed
by Shannon, Briotti, and the Filipino boy, with Rick bringing up the
rear. He paused long enough to unstring the bow and put it back in the
quiver.

As the group paused before making the difficult stage of the journey
around the cone, Rick took the Megabuck unit from Tony. In the
excitement no one had called Chahda.

"On our way back now, Chahda," Rick said calmly. "All six of us."

The Hindu boy's yell of triumph and relief almost shattered Rick's
eardrum. He whispered, "Stow it, you wild Indian. You'll ruin my
hearing."

"Sorry," Chahda said, but he didn't sound it. "Hurry back now. I wait
for word to come."

Rick followed as the group started off again. He wondered how the guard
was doing. By all reckoning, the man should still be unconscious. He'd
better be!

The party reached the eastern slope of the volcano, directly under the
cone, and started the last descent. The rope ladders made the trip
comparatively easy, except for the final drop before the ground leveled
off somewhat. It was a rough stretch, too long for a ladder. A single
rope had been saved for the purpose. Rick took it from Scotty and made
it fast around a spike they had driven earlier. Zircon was the first to
use it. He went down swiftly, keeping hold of the rope in case of a
slip.

Scotty followed, then Shannon. The lanky zoologist was halfway down when
Rick felt the rope tighten with a jerk and he heard Shannon's choked
cry of pain. Rick rechecked to be sure the rope was secure, then
motioned to Briotti and the Filipino boy. "Go on. We've got to get down
to him."

Scotty and Zircon, climbing back from below, reached Shannon's side
before Rick and the others could get there. In a few moments the six
were clustered together.

"A rock turned under me," Shannon explained. "I felt the bone snap in my
leg. You'd better go on. You can send help back to me later."

"Nonsense," Zircon grated. "Boys, what can we use for a splint?"

Rick was already pulling arrows out of the quiver. "These are Dr.
Shannon's. I'm sure he won't mind if we use them."

"You have my permission," Shannon said with a painful chuckle.

The blunt-headed arrows were quickly lashed into two bundles. Rick and
Scotty shed their light jackets and Scotty's knife flashed in the faint
starlight as he sliced them into padding. Rick took the extra bowstrings
from the quiver and handed them to Zircon. The bowstrings would make
ideal ties. Within a short time Shannon's leg was securely splinted and
Zircon was giving instructions.

"Scotty, go untie the rope and bring it down. You and Rick will hold
from above, while Tony and I carry Howard. You, Mr. Torres, will please
stay directly in front of us to test the footing and warn us of loose
stones."

"Of course, sir," the Filipino boy replied quickly.

Scotty returned from his climb with the rope coiled. He made several
turns around Shannon's waist, pulled the rope up under his armpits, and
secured it with a bowline.

"Slow and easy does it," Zircon directed.

Slow was the key word. Rick and Scotty kept the safety line taut while
Briotti and Zircon moved the injured man an inch at a time, bracing
themselves against the rock and feeling for each step. Zircon, the most
powerful of them all, had to carry most of the scientist's weight.

Rick was worried. The trip across the volcano had taken quite a while
and now time was running out on them. He looked at the luminous dial of
his watch and realized with a sudden chill that dawn was only a half
hour away. "We've got to hurry," he said.

"They change the lookout just before dawn," Tony said. "Even if he's
still unconscious we won't have much time once they find him!"

"You're right." Zircon stopped and began untying the rope that secured
Shannon.

"What are you doing?" Scotty asked anxiously.

"Changing methods," Zircon said grimly. He handed the rope to Scotty.
"Cut off a length and tie Howard to me. Then secure the remainder under
my armpits."

Rick knew that it would be a terrible strain on the big scientist, but
it would be faster--if his strength held out.

Zircon picked Shannon up in his arms, and Scotty lashed them together,
making a kind of sling that would help support Shannon's weight. Then he
tied one end of the remaining rope around Zircon's barrel chest, up
under his armpits.

Rick, Scotty, Briotti, and the Filipino boy grasped the rope and held it
firmly while the big scientist walked upright down the remaining slope,
one slow step after another, the others following but always keeping the
rope tight in case he started to fall.

They negotiated the hardest part of the slope, then Zircon leaned back
against a boulder and rested for a moment. The final hundred yards
wasn't steep, but it was strewn with loose boulders and lava chunks.
Zircon wouldn't be able to speed up much. Rick looked at his watch
again, then at the sky. He didn't say anything. The big physicist was
doing more than any man should be asked to do. He couldn't do it any
faster.

Scotty moved to his side. "Got arrows left?"

"Yes. Most of the big broadheads and half a dozen of the small
broadheads. Why?"

"We may need them. I'm scared. The guard's relief must know by now that
his pal got conked."

"We're both scared," Rick corrected. "But what can we do?"

"Be ready to fight."

Zircon called hoarsely, "Let's go!"

They were off again, the scientist plodding slowly ahead, down the last
stretch to the cove. About half of the distance had been covered when
Rick saw the first sail. It was close to shore, near the cove where
they had anchored the vinta.

Zircon saw it, too. He called softly, "Scotty! Leave the rope to the
others. Get ahead of me and cover us. But don't shoot until they start
something."

Scotty moved ahead, unslinging his rifle as he went.

Zircon speeded up as much as possible. Fortunately, the going was easier
now and the big scientist could make better time. Rick helped to keep
the rope braced, and tried to divide his attention between watching the
uncertain footing and looking for other sails.

The first pirate vinta was nosing into the cove when two others came
into sight. And, at nearly the same moment, Zircon reached the small
patch of level ground at the cove's edge.

Rick dropped the rope and hurried to the big scientist's side, drawing
his knife. He cut the ropes that bound Shannon to Zircon, and they
lowered the injured zoologist to a sitting position with a big rock at
his back.

Dawn was breaking fast now. Already Rick could see details more clearly
and he knew it was only minutes to practically full daylight. The
Spindrift group could see the pirate vintas clearly now against the sea,
but the pirates could not yet see them because they were still in
shadow, dark rock at their backs. Still, the pirates would try the cove
first. It was the logical place.

He estimated their chances quickly, and saw that the situation was
hopeless. There was no chance of getting their vinta past the pirates.
They would have to fight. He drew the bow sections out of the quiver and
got ready. Next to him, Zircon was checking the clip in his pistol.

Rick took the Megabuck network unit from his pocket and called softly,
"Chahda!"

"Here, Rick. Long time wait. How things go?"

"Not good. Shannon broke a leg. Also, we're at the cove, which is
filling up with pirate vintas. We're cut off."

Chahda whistled. "I say plenty no good! Look, you figure way to get to
clear water. I figure way to pick you up. Starting right now!"

"Okay," Rick said, without knowing how it could be done. "Come on in,
but don't get trapped!"

There was a sudden chorus of pirate yells, then one of the Moros fired a
shot. Scotty's rifle snapped, and pirate rifles answered. The fight was
on! Rick grabbed a broadhead arrow from the quiver and hurried forward.




CHAPTER XIX

Chahda Sweeps the Sea


The exchange of rifleshots lasted only a few moments without causing
casualties to either side. Scotty had fired more in warning than to
score a hit. The Spindrifters had taken cover behind the rocks, and the
protection had been enough.

Rick sized up the situation. More vintas were crowding into the cove.
There were so many now they got in each other's way. Before long the
entire cove would be jammed with vintas and the Moros would come
swarming ashore. Unfortunately, the sea was calm, with only low surf on
the eastern shore. Heavy breakers would have been helpful in keeping the
pirates busy, Rick thought.

One thing was clear as glass. They couldn't wait for the pirates to
overrun them. Rick hurried to Zircon's side. "Professor, can you carry
Shannon? We've got to get to the other side of the cove, then across the
rocks to the sea. It's a better position to defend, and we might have a
chance to get to the water when Chahda comes. I've called him. He's on
the way in."

"Rick's right," Scotty chimed in. "Get going and I'll cover you."

Zircon nodded without speaking. He stepped swiftly to Shannon's side and
picked the zoologist up. Then he followed Rick to the end of the cove
and started the climb over the tiny spit of land that separated the cove
from the open sea.

It was rough going. Tony Briotti gave Zircon a hand over the roughest
places, while Rick and Elpidio Torres stood by to assist where needed.
Scotty stayed at the edge of the cove, rifle at the ready.

The pirates hadn't gotten organized yet. The Spindrifters were still in
deep shadow and not clearly visible. Now and then a pirate took a
rifleshot, but that was more from lack of discipline than a target at
which to shoot.

Rick hoped that the Spindrift group could reach the seaward side of the
spit they were now climbing before the pirates swarmed ashore. There was
a good chance of defending the spit, particularly with Scotty's rifle.

Zircon reached the top and went over, and Rick called, "Scotty! Come
on!"

Scotty instantly turned and ran.

A hail of badly aimed rifle slugs spattered off the rock across an area
forty feet wide as the pirates shot at the sound of Rick's voice. None
came near the mark. Then, a few pirates, smarter than the rest, realized
what was going on. As Tony Briotti and the Torres boy were silhouetted
briefly against the sky at the top of the rise, the handful of alert
pirates fired. Most shots missed, but Rick heard the Filipino boy gasp.

Scotty reached Rick's side and said softly, "Let's go, and slide over
the top on your stomach."

Rick didn't need the advice. He had no intention of letting the pirates
catch him in silhouette. He crouched low and moved the few feet to the
top, found a boulder, and slipped quickly around it. Scotty followed a
moment later.

"I'm staying here at the top," Scotty said. "If any pirates try to come
after us, I'll have a clear shot. And when they get wise and come around
to the sea side, I can shoot down on them. How are we going to get out
of this?"

"You tell me," Rick suggested. "I don't know."

The pirates hadn't been long in catching on. A few vintas were already
rounding the cove point heading for the party now huddled behind
boulders on a ledge just above the sea. Rick hurried down to join the
others, leaving Scotty to guard the rear.

Tony Briotti greeted him. "Look."

Rick's eyes followed the archaeologist's pointing finger. Off to the
southeast, on a sea tinted pink from the rising sun, he saw the low
lines of the _Swift Arrow_. Chahda was on his way!

Zircon bellowed, "Watch it!" He echoed his words with the flat slap of a
pistol shot. The first vinta had reached the group and was standing only
a few feet offshore. Others were crowding in behind it. Rick got ready
to shoot again, and saw that the Torres boy, a bloody handkerchief tied
around his upper arm, was throwing rocks with his good hand. Tony
Briotti followed suit, picking up large chunks of lava and slamming them
into the pirate craft.

Rick spotted a rifleman in the nearest vinta and sent a broadhead arrow
at him. The arrow passed between the pirate's arm and side, but pinned
him by his shirt to the vinta mast. Rick quickly nocked another arrow
and waited for a clear shot.

Behind him, Scotty's rifle spoke once, twice, then a third time. Yells
from beyond the spit of land showed that the pirates had tried to come
at them overland. Rick hoped Scotty's single rifle would be enough. At
least his pal was shooting from cover, while the pirates were in the
open.

A vinta tried to approach and Rick sent an arrow into the helmsman's
shoulder. The vinta sheered off and collided with another.

It was only a question of time before the pirates were forced ashore by
their very numbers. Rick knew that his small group wouldn't last long,
not against barongs and krises. He shot again, and took a pirate
rifleman out of the action. Zircon's heavy automatic picked off the
first pirate that tried to climb ashore, and slammed him back onto his
fellows.

Tony Briotti aided the sudden pile-up of pirates with a chunk of lava
the size of a basketball. Sudden screams of pain and rage came from the
mass of struggling Moros.

Other vintas had pulled into shore farther away and Rick saw pirates
scrambling up the rock unhindered. He got two with arrows, then Scotty
fired from his vantage point and drove them to cover.

Above the Moro battle cries and screams of rage Rick suddenly heard the
horn blast of the _Swift Arrow_. He looked up in time to see Chahda
driving at full speed, parallel with the beach. As the Hindu boy drew
close, the _Swift Arrow's_ saluting cannon suddenly erupted a load of
tacks into the cluster of vintas. The pirates scrambled to cover against
this new menace as the MTB swept by. The terrific bow wave lifted the
vintas high and sent them crashing into one another. Two of them turned
over.

Rick fell back and grabbed his radio unit, quickly plugging in the
earphone. "Chahda! That was great!"

The Hindu boy sounded excited. "I make short turn now, do same thing
again, only closer. You get ready. When I toot horn, you get to water
somehow. Okay?"

"We'll try," Rick answered grimly. He beckoned to Scotty, who came down
to join him, keeping a watchful eye to the rear in case a pirate tried
to come over the rise. The two hurried to Zircon's side. Rick said
swiftly, "We've got to get to the water. Chahda's coming back right now.
We have to be ready when he toots."

Zircon handed Tony the pistol. "Keep their heads down, Tony. I'm going
to take Howard up the shore to that nearest vinta. The rest of you come
after me. Hurry it up! We'll have to swim for it, unless we can grab the
vinta."

The big scientist reached Shannon's side just as Chahda started his
second run. Again the Hindu boy opened with a blast from the saluting
cannon, then crowded close inshore, letting his bow wave drive the
vintas hard against each other and the shore. The crashing vintas sent
their crews down in heaps. The MTB was so close to shore that Rick could
see the string Chahda had rigged to trigger the cannon by remote
control.

The pirates were too busy to worry about the Spindrifters for the
moment. Zircon scooped Shannon up and hurried along the shore, ignoring
the wash from the MTB that lashed over the rocks. Rick and Scotty were
right behind him, weapons ready.

A vinta with only two pirates aboard was scraping back down over the
rock. The rest of its crew were struggling in the water.

"Get them!" Zircon yelled.

Rick caught one with an arrow just as the man rose to a sitting position
on the gunwale. The heavy shaft carried him over the side. Scotty's
rifle sent the other one to the bottom of the vinta in a heap.

The boys moved fast, grabbing the vinta before the retreating waves
carried it away. Zircon jumped in, turning as he did so. He fell, the
zoologist in his arms. The mast took the blow of the scientist's great
weight and broke off short, leaving a tangle of sail, mast, and boom.

"Get in!" Scotty yelled at Tony and Torres. His rifle barked at the
pirates further up the beach, driving them to cover again. Zircon put
Shannon down and heaved the pirate Scotty had wounded onto the shore.

Rick followed Tony and Torres into the boat, then yelled for Scotty to
push off. He grabbed the radio unit again and called, "Chahda! What do
we do now?"

"Get little way from shore and go into water. Catch rope when I come.
All must catch! You watch when I toot horn, and you see."

Rick yelled the instructions to the others, then stuffed the set back
into his pocket, dropped his bow, and took a paddle. Scotty knelt beside
him, a length of board in his hand. "Let's go, boy," he said urgently.

Under the impetus of Scotty's initial shove and the boys' paddles the
vinta moved slowly out until it was a good thirty feet from shore. The
nearest of the pirate craft moved to intercept it, four Moros at the
paddles.

Scotty stopped paddling and started shooting. The pirates dropped
paddles and dove to the bottom of the vinta.

Rick looked about anxiously. Where was Chahda?

Then he saw the MTB making a sweeping turn at the northern tip of the
island. As he watched, Chahda straightened out and the bow wave of the
MTB curled as he picked up speed.

"Better get in the water!" Rick called. "Tony, give me the pistol, and
take Shannon's bow and quiver. Better hang them both on your back.
Scotty and I will stay in the vinta and cover you!"

Tony nodded and exchanged weapons. "I'll help Zircon with Shannon. Come
on, Pete. Over the side and swim out a little way."

The Torres boy responded at once, diving headlong into the water. Tony
followed and took Shannon as Zircon handed the injured man down. Then
Zircon got into the water, too, and led the four away from the vinta.

Rick and Scotty watched the tangle of pirate craft, waiting for the next
pirate boat to get untangled and make a try for them. Chahda's bow wave
had left the pirate fleet in a shambles, some of the vintas turned over,
nearly all with sails and booms in a heap on deck or over the pirates.

One vinta extricated itself and the pirates suddenly located the boys. A
Moro raised his rifle to fire and found it smashed in his hands as
Scotty snapped off a shot. The pirate's stock splintered and the force
of the slug smashed the barrel across his face. He went down.

Then one of the pirates on shore made a try. He stood upright, rifle
poised. Rick fired with the heavy automatic. He missed. The pirate
looked at the silvery spatter of lead on a rock two inches from his
right knee and dove for cover.

Chahda flashed by, and the bow wave lifted Rick and Scotty high into the
air. They grabbed at the vinta with their free hands and had to grip
tightly to keep from being thrown as it rolled wildly. Rick snapped the
safety on and lowered the hammer to half cock, then tucked the pistol
securely in his belt. For a moment he hung on with both hands, then
called to Scotty.

"Let's hit the drink!"

Scotty was trying to sling his rifle on his back while holding on with
one hand. He gave it up and went over the side. Once in the sea, he rose
to the surface and got the rifle sling into position. Rick waited until
the vinta was on the downward slope of the backwash from the shore, then
went in headfirst. The cool water engulfed him and he twisted upward and
broke the surface.

Scotty was waiting. The two of them swam outward, to where the other
four were treading water, waiting for Chahda.

Rick heard the MTB's horn let go with a long blast, and he rose high out
of the water to look. For a moment he thought Chahda was out of control,
because the big boat was spinning in a tight circle. That could only be
done by putting one engine in full reverse and the other in full
forward!

Then the boy saw what Chahda had done. The centrifugal force of the
whirling MTB sent a fifty-gallon drum dancing across the water to the
full length of a long rope. As the barrel swung wide, Chahda
straightened out and put on speed.

"Come on!" Rick yelled at Scotty. He stretched out in the water for a
fast sprint. Leave it to Chahda! Had he tried to swing the barrel out
while traveling in a straight line, it would merely have fallen astern.
Circling the MTB at a fast speed was the only way to get the rope out
far enough from the boat to give them all a chance of grabbing it.

Rick looked up and saw that both he and Scotty were just inside the path
that the barrel was traveling. It was falling astern now that Chahda was
on a straight course, but it would still be far enough away from the
side to catch them all.

He stopped and looked at his friends, and saw that Zircon had locked his
legs around Shannon's chest and was ready. Tony and Torres were facing
the oncoming MTB, ready to grab.

"Stand by," he called to Scotty.

"Don't miss it," Scotty called back.

Chahda flashed by.

Rick had a quick glimpse of Zircon being hauled along like an oversized
surfboard, then the rope was on him. He grabbed with both hands and
braced himself for the shock. The jerk on his arms was tremendous, but
he held tight and flailed his legs to get his head above water. After
one gasping breath he managed to turn himself against the force of the
water and lay flat on his stomach. By arching his back, he brought his
face above water, and in a moment he was planing along like a water ski.
Next to him on the rope Scotty had done the same.

[Illustration: _Rick braced himself for the shock_]

Rick counted anxiously, then heaved a relieved sigh. All present! But
unless Chahda slowed down soon, Shannon would be in serious trouble.
Apparently the Hindu boy was keeping a close watch on his catch. He
dropped his speed until he was barely making headway, giving Zircon a
chance to pull Shannon up to the rope where the injured man could help
himself.

Then Chahda hauled in on the rope until Zircon was directly alongside.
The Hindu boy had thrown over the ship's boarding ladder. Zircon grabbed
it and held.

Rick and Scotty left the rope and swam rapidly toward the boat. Both had
realized that Zircon would need help. So had Tony, who was already
helping Shannon to the ladder.

Chahda lowered a line with a bowline in the end, and Zircon slipped the
loop over Shannon's shoulders and made sure it was secure under his
arms. Then the big scientist hurried up the ladder and called down,
"Hold him away from the side! Rick, get on the ladder. Scotty, come help
me. Tony, keep his feet clear."

In a moment all hands were in position. Rick wrapped one leg around a
wooden rung and slipped one arm behind the ropes. Then, as Scotty and
Zircon hauled, he held Shannon out from the boat so the injured leg
could not strike the side or a rung.

As soon as Shannon's shoulders were at the railing, Tony went by Rick
and helped pull the scientist aboard. Rick waited to give Torres a hand,
noting as the Filipino boy climbed up that the rough bandage on his
wounded arm was stained with fresh blood. The boy gave him a wide grin
as he climbed to safety.

A rifle slug interrupted Rick's answering grin. It slapped into the hull
only a few feet away. With his free hand he found his knife and severed
the rope that held the barrel, then he called, "Go, Chahda! Get out of
here!"

The roar of the twin engines was his answer. By the time he had climbed
over the side and hauled in the ladder, the MTB was reaching top speed
as Chahda put the pirate island astern.

Rick glanced back. The pirate vintas were still clustered around the
shore near the cove. Far above them, the black rock of the volcano was
pink with the rays of the newly risen sun.

For long moments Rick stared at Shan, then he turned with a grin to
shake hands with his friends.




CHAPTER XX

The Patrol Takes Over


Colonel Felix Rojas of the Philippines Constabulary paced the deck of
the _Swift Arrow_ while he listened to the story related by the
Spindrifters. Next to the MTB was a gunboat of the Philippines Naval
Patrol, and beyond that a destroyer-escort loaded to the gunwales with
constabulary troopers.

Rick and his friends had arrived at the port of Dalun, on Tawi Tawi,
just in time to catch the two-ship convoy that was about to leave in
search of them. The presence of Colonel Rojas was a surprise, but, as he
explained, once reports of the pirates reached him, he had taken the
next plane home to assume command.

The group in the pilothouse of the MTB was complete, except for Shannon
and Elpidio Torres who were receiving medical treatment on the gunboat.

Hobart Zircon covered the story from the point of view of the searchers,
then Tony Briotti filled in the details of what had happened to him,
Shannon, and "Pete" Torres.

Colonel Rojas listened without interruption, then shook his head. "I
can't understand it. The pirates didn't want you and Dr. Shannon. They
wanted the Torres boy. Why didn't they simply kill the two of you?"

Tony Briotti shrugged. "It wasn't simple humanity, believe me. They have
none. I think they realized that Pete Torres had to be returned alive.
His father is too important a man in this country for Pete to be harmed.
It would mean that the entire armed forces of the country would be
turned loose to hunt the pirates down. So, if they planned to send Pete
home after getting the ransom, they also had to return us."

"Because young Torres would have reported your deaths, and the
Philippines armed forces would probably be augmented by American
warships," Colonel Rojas finished. "That's as good a reason as any.
We'll accept it for lack of anything else."

Rick spoke up. "There's one hole in Tony's reasoning. They also had to
assume that once the prisoners were released, the authorities would have
a description of the island. So it would only be a matter of time before
the pirate hangout was located."

"Sorry, Rick," Tony corrected. "None of us had the remotest idea of
where we were, or what the island looked like. We were brought in by
night, blindfolded, and taken to the cliff cave. From there we could see
only the western shore. Why, we didn't even know we were on the side of
a volcano until you took us off."

"That gives your reason even greater acceptance," Zircon boomed.
"Actually, what puzzles me is why the pirates kept you so long. Usually,
if ransom isn't forthcoming pretty fast, the victims are never seen
alive."

Rojas answered, "That's generally true, I'm sure. But we have to
remember the distances and lack of communications in this part of the
world. Also, the ransom was a million pesos. No one has that much in
cash, even a wealthy man like Torres. He had sent word that he would
pay, but that it would take many days to raise the cash in small bills.
His deadline was the day after tomorrow."

The ransom would never be paid now, Rick thought. Cables had been sent
to Manila and Spindrift the very first thing, while Shannon and Torres
were being moved to the gunboat's sick bay.

Zircon waved a big hand. "Anyway, it's all over now, and reasons become
less important. My question, Colonel Rojas, is what are you going to do
about these pirates? I'm sure you can wipe out the main island, but
there are groups on many other islands."

The constabulary officer smiled grimly. "We will strike Shan just before
dawn tomorrow. I assure you that my men and the sailors of the patrol
will take pleasure in breaking up that little nest. As for the other
groups, that is a more difficult problem."

"You need spies," Chahda stated.

"We do," Rojas agreed. "However, once the main island is taken, the
local groups will have no central leadership. I might add that Paulo
Lacson has already broken up the Davao gang."

"So fast?" Scotty asked incredulously.

"Three days ago. The Bagobos had reasons to fear reprisals, you see, and
Paulo took no chances. He kept a platoon with full automatic weapons
hidden in the village houses. The pirate gang attacked and got a very
warm reception. Those who survived are prisoners."

"Good for Major Lacson!" Rick exclaimed. "We were impressed by his
efficiency. You can see why."

"How about Zamboanga?" Zircon boomed.

"Apparently there is no gang there. Captain Lim released the Moro you
caught, but he's back in custody again, recaptured by Lim as soon as
orders went out from Manila. Lim believes he's one of the main leaders
of the pirates, partly because he personally checked on you in Manila,
then followed you to Zamboanga. The gang nearest Zamboanga is the one
that tried to get you in the channel. Another gunboat is searching the
area right now, trying to locate an island fishing colony with too many
armed vintas and too many rifles."

"Maybe you can find pirate pigeons and turn loose," Chahda offered.
"Then planes could follow."

Rojas stared at the boy thoughtfully. "Now there is a useful idea. I'll
get off a general instruction to look for pigeon cotes."

Tony Briotti chuckled. "He's full of ideas. Now, if he can only get one
about cleaning the polish from Rick's face so we can recognize him
again, we can call this case closed."

A hail from the gunboat brought the talk to a halt. Shannon and Torres
were ready to rejoin the party. The scientist's broken leg was in a
cast, with a steel brace at the bottom so that he would be able to walk
around, cast and all, in a few days. Pete Torres had a neat bandage on
his arm; apparently the Filipino Naval medico had removed the pirate
rifle slug easily enough.

Once the group was assembled again, Rojas asked, "What are your plans?"

"Back to Manila from Zamboanga, and then to Spindrift by the first
plane," Zircon stated.

"Go if you like," Howard Shannon said calmly. "Tony and I haven't even
started our work here. We're staying."

"You can't go rambling around with a broken leg," Zircon roared.

"Whose leg is it? Besides, I work with my head, not my legs."

Scotty whispered to Rick, "Who's going to win?"

Rick grinned. "Shannon. Zircon's yelling too loud. That means he's only
arguing for effect."

His prediction was right. After a few more exchanges Zircon turned to
the boys. "You want to stay on with these stubborn idiots?"

"Maybe for a little while," Rick said, and Scotty nodded.

Zircon threw up his hands. "All right! If we all pitch in, maybe we can
leave sooner."

Chahda offered, "Pretty good vacation, maybe. I stay a while."

"If you stay, you'll need a guide, won't you?" Elpidio Torres asked
hesitatingly.

The Spindrifters stared at him, then broke into laughter.

"That makes it unanimous," Rick said with a grin. "If Pete can get
permission from his father."

Colonel Rojas looked at the group with admiration. "Nothing stops you,
does it? Not even being kidnaped by pirates and held for weeks."

"It wasn't so bad," Tony Briotti replied. "They fed us, and we weren't
mistreated, except for being knocked around that first night. We're
healthy enough, barring Howard's leg and Pete's arm."

Zircon sighed. "Well, I suppose we can go back to Zamboanga and start
over again. We'll have to talk with Santos about his missing boat. Let's
hope you can recover it, through diplomatic channels, or something.
Otherwise, I'm sure his insurance will take care of it."

Colonel Rojas coughed. "This expedition against Shan won't take more
than a day or two, and I'm in need of a little rest myself. I may join
you."

His announcement was greeted with cheers.

"There's only one thing that bothers me about this plan." Tony Briotti
said, "Howard and I are peaceful folk, on a peaceful mission. But we
know from long experience that when Rick, Scotty, and Chahda walk into
a place, peace flies out the window."

"It's already flown for this trip," Rick pointed out. "We weren't the
ones who chased it, either."

"No," Tony said warmly. "If we haven't really thanked you, it's only
because words just aren't adequate. You didn't drive peace away this
time, but you certainly brought it back!"




_The_ RICK BRANT SCIENCE-ADVENTURE _Stories_


BY JOHN BLAINE

[Illustration]

Rick Brant is the boy who with his pal Scotty lives on an island called
Spindrift and takes part in so many thrilling adventures and baffling
mysteries involving science and electronics. You can share every one of
these adventures in the pages of Rick's books. They are available at
your book store in handsome, low-priced editions.


    THE ROCKET'S SHADOW

    THE LOST CITY

    SEA GOLD

    100 FATHOMS UNDER

    THE WHISPERING BOX MYSTERY

    THE PHANTOM SHARK

    SMUGGLERS' REEF

    THE CAVES OF FEAR

    STAIRWAY TO DANGER

    THE GOLDEN SKULL

    THE WAILING OCTOPUS

    THE ELECTRONIC MIND READER

    THE SCARLET LAKE MYSTERY

    THE PIRATES OF SHAN

    THE BLUE GHOST MYSTERY

    THE EGYPTIAN CAT MYSTERY

    THE FLAMING MOUNTAIN






End of Project Gutenberg's The Pirates of Shan, by Harold Leland Goodwin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIRATES OF SHAN ***

***** This file should be named 32059-8.txt or 32059-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/5/32059/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
