                             SECURITY RISK


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: Security Risk

Author: Ed M. Clinton

Release Date: April 02, 2011 [EBook #35759]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY RISK ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Greg Weeks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


                             SECURITY RISK

                         BY ED M. CLINTON, JR.

                        _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_



At moments like this, General David Walker always thought fleetingly of
the good old days when he had hated the army. As usual, he smashed the
thought out of his mind with a distinct sense of remorse.

He looked up again at the seamed face of the Chief of Staff, General
Marcus Meriwether. "This could be serious," he said slowly, with a sick
sense of the statement’s inadequacy. An old tic suddenly returned,
tugging at the left corner of his mouth.

The deadly, unsmiling expression on Meriwether’s face did not change as
he slid more tightly into his chair. "You know as well as I that it
means the Interplanetary Confederation is ready to go to war with us."

Walker stared at the typed statement on his desk. It was a decoded
intelligence message from United Terra’s prime agent in the
Interplanetary Confederation, and it was very brief: the Confederation
had developed a long-range neural weapon effectively cancelling out
every armament development achieved by United Terra in fifteen years of
a cold war that of late had become bitter cold. The all-but-autonomous
colonies of Mars and Venus, united now for twenty years in an economic
league, had been itching for independence for a quarter of a century.
The itch had developed into a mighty burning.

"You are fully aware," Meriwether continued, his face still set, "of our
feeling that the Confederation has been eager to take on Terra. They’ve
clearly been waiting for some positive advantage to offset our pure
strength-in-numbers."


[Illustration: __It was a touchable touching an untouchable. Both
scientist and general were doing their own version of right....__]


Walker forced his eyes upward and stared at his superior. "Your tone
says that such a war might be—"

"Unwelcome at this time. Unwelcome at this time." Meriwether shifted
around in his chair, and scratched at its leather arms with the
manicured tips of his gnarled fingers. "Walker, I don’t have to tell you
that this weapon, if it is what our agent infers—and there is no reason
to believe otherwise—that this weapon makes it impossible for us to go
to war with the Confederation—unless, as Chief of Weapons Development,
you can tell me that we have something in our arsenal to combat it."

Walker rubbed at the tic. "Nothing," he said quietly.

Meriwether leaned forward, his hands crooked backward against the chair
arms like catapult springs. "That answer is unacceptable. There are
other questions you must answer, Walker, questions in some ways even
more important than that basic one. Why haven’t we developed this weapon
ourselves? Why haven’t we been aware of its potential existence? Where
are the defensive devices which would naturally develop from such
cognizance? These things are all your department, Walker." His voice
pitched upward an hysterical fraction. "It just doesn’t make sense, you
know. We’ve a hundred times the personnel, ten times the facilities,
unlimited funds—but they’ve beaten us to it." He stood up and pushed his
chair back, eyes squinting out of a reddening face that seemed on the
point of bursting. "Why, Walker?"

Once again Walker thought about how he had hated the army when he was a
bright young physics student. That was a long time ago—So much had
happened. The doors had closed around him, one at a time, doors closing
on the scientific mind. And so now, instead of a research scientist in
white smock with textbook, he was a military administrator in smart
greys with glittering stars of military rank.

"I’ll say this, Walker," Meriwether shouted, his voice breaking again.
"We’d better catch up quick. Mighty quick. Let’s put it this way. It
might mean your rank and your job, Walker. But you won’t give a damn.
Because we’ll have lost the war. We’ll have lost the colonies. And you
know what that would mean, Walker?" He bent forward across the desk, his
face exploding into Walker’s eyes. "Only a fool believes that United
Terra can survive in an economy without tri-planetary hegemony.

"Walker, you’ve all the authority within my power to grant. You’ll have
no trouble getting money. But—get the answer. _Quick._"

Walker blinked after him as he strode to the door. "I’ll try to hold off
a federal investigation as long as I can," Meriwether added, turning
from the half-opened door. "But I can’t guarantee a thing."

                                  ————

Walker sat alone in a cubicle of light in the darkened city and gulped
down his twentieth cup of coffee. It had grown cold in the cup and with
a grimace he pushed it aside.

There was no doubt about it. He thumbed through the sheaf of scribbled
notes he had transcribed from stacks of documents and racks of spools
from Security files. Clearly, he had the answer to Meriwether’s
questions. But, having it, he did not quite know what to do with it.

There was, however, no doubt at all: United Terra had been on the track
of the neural weapon—ten years earlier. Could have had it—and had lost
the chance.

He rubbed his thumbs hard against his tired eyes and tried to remember
back that ten years: at that time he had been Chief of Weapons
Development for perhaps three years. His own name, though, had appeared
in none of the files he had examined, so apparently he had not been
directly involved in the security hearings. But he _should_ remember.

Dr. Otto Millet. _Otto Millet._ He let the name roll around his brain,
until shortly an image began to form—an image of a smiling man, greying
at the temples, wearing a flamboyant sports shirt and affecting a very
close haircut. A man perhaps forty. In the image, he was a laughing man.

He remembered now. Dr. Otto Millet: into government service on the
inertia of a fantastic reputation as a research physicist specializing
in magnetic field studies. A man he had instantly disliked.

He bent forward and reread what he had scrawled in his last notes, a
verbatim extract from the report of the security committee.

"It is clear that Dr. Millet’s conversations and letters with Professor
Greyman, together with his unrepentant attitude, render him a security
risk. His various security clearances are therefore revoked, and he is
hereafter prohibited access to all classified files and to any
government research and development laboratory."

Since virtually all laboratories were government supported, that was to
all intents and purposes the end of Millet’s career as an experimental
physicist.

Where had Millet gone? What had he done since? Walker scraped a
cigarette out of the half-empty pack in his pocket. More important: what
was he doing now?

He inhaled deeply and sent clouds of smoke skewing across the room. Had
the man really been a traitor? Walker tried to place himself in the time
of Millet’s hearing. He’d been not too many years out of school then,
with the bitterness of his frustrated ambition to be a research
physicist still rankling him; perhaps this had colored his view of
Millet. He stared at his desk, almost shocked that this thought should
have occurred to him. It shook him, for it told him something about
himself which he did not particularly care to know.

Nowhere had he been able to find any evidence as to what had happened to
Millet since. Banished, the government seemed to forget him. But one
thing was clear to Walker, and he pondered it deeply as he sucked on the
last quarter-inch of his cigarette and poured himself another cup of
cold black coffee. One big thing: Millet had been directing development
along lines that would have led to the neural weapon; he had even signed
a report, early in his project effort, which had referred to the
possibility of "a neural device."

Had he gone over to the Confederation? It would account for their
possession of the weapon now. But surely—_surely_, this fact would have
been observed and reported by Terran intelligence agents.

Walker, infinitely tired, forgot his coffee and began to tidy up the
desk, filing everything he wanted to keep in an electronically locked
cabinet, shoving everything else into the destruction of the vibrator.
He pondered for a moment the powdered secrets that were heaped like
black dust in the bottom of the canister: a symbol of safety to a
terrified world.

Step one: find Millet. _Find Millet._

                                  ————

It took the Secret Service exactly twenty-nine hours to locate Dr. Otto
Millet. Thirty minutes later, Walker was climbing out of a government
helicopter and staring at Millet’s small house through squinted eyes
which he shielded with both hands against the blazing desert sun. The
house was fronted by a neat lawn and a white fence entwined with red
roses; there appeared to be a rather large garden in the rear. The style
of the house bothered him a little: it had passed out of popularity
thirty years before. Its lack of a conventional roofport had forced them
to land the ’copter on the desert itself.

He straightened and pushed through the creaking gate. Flagstone steps
curved toward the porch, and he minced along them, uncertain, now that
he had arrived, of what he would say to Millet. The damned house, he
thought—so different from what he had expected; it had thrown his whole
thinking out of order.

He hated himself for feeling uneasy.

There was neither vodor nor contact system of any kind at the door, and
he brushed his hand against his forehead in a gesture of frustration. He
stared at his palm—it had come away wet with sweat, and he wondered if
it were all because of the desert sun.

Tentatively, he banged on the door with his fist. There was no answer.

_Damn Millet_, he thought, wiping his forehead again. Why couldn’t the
man have a videophone like any normal person so you could find out if he
were home without taking a trip halfway across the country?

He turned, stamping angrily as he did so, and was startled to see a man,
wearing work clothes and holding a pair of heavy soiled gloves in his
left hand, standing on the ground by the end of the porch. He was nearly
bald, intensely bronzed, and he was smiling.

"Wondered when you’d see me." He nodded toward the gate. "I was standing
right there when you came up. You just breezed right past." His smile
broadened. "You were so interested in being surprised that you couldn’t
see what you came for."

"It must have been that damned glare," muttered Walker, shaking his
head. Then, impolitely, "Are you Millet?"

"Otto Millet," the other replied, inclining his head slightly. "You’re
from the government. I can tell because of the uniform, you see." Walker
flushed. "The government hasn’t thought about me in a number of years,"
the scientist added. He came up onto the porch and peered at the symbol
on the left lapel of Walker’s jacket. "Ah! Alma mater. Weapons
Development." He squinted at Walker. "David Walker, I presume?" He
chuckled loudly but Walker failed to see the humor. "I remember you, you
see; what a shame you can’t return the compliment."

"It’s hot out here," complained Walker, in growing discomfort.

Millet opened the door. "Won’t you come in? It’s better inside."

There it was again, thought Walker; the insolence, the imperturbable
smile. He grunted and went in; it was, mercifully, considerably cooler.

He looked around. It was a very cluttered living room, not messy but
tossed about with the artifacts that the man obviously liked to have
around him. There was an ancient painting by Bonestell hanging on one
wall, a startlingly accurate twentieth-century concept of the appearance
of Mars; several long pipe racks, filled to overflowing, in various
spots around the room; a typewriter on a table in a corner, and piles of
paper; books lining the walls, and stacked on the floor in heaps and on
the table beside the typewriter; a map of the earth on the wall above
the typewriter, a three-dimensional Waterson projection. The furniture
was clean but—not old; _lived with_.

Walker went over to the wall map and peered closely.

"One of Waterson’s first," remarked Millet, closing the door. "Sit down,
Walker, and tell me all about Weapons Development. How is the mass
murder department doing these days?"

Walker felt his ears redden and he was arrested in the very act of
sitting down. "Really," he said, "it’s not something we _like_ to think
about, you know."

"Suppose not." Millet fiddled with several pipes in a rack beside his
chair, selected one, and began filling it with rough-cut tobacco from a
battered canister. "To business, then. Why the visit?"

Walker cleared his throat and tried to remember the little prefatory
weasel words he had painfully assembled during the flight from Omaha.
"First of all, Dr. Millet, I find myself a little embarrassed. After
all, your parting from government service was not of the happiest nature
for you—"

"Don’t be foolish. Happiest day of my life, Walker."

Walker had a sudden sense of being impaled, and the rest of the little
speech was dissipated in the wave of shock which swept over him. He
forced his mouth shut, and gasped, "You’re not serious!"

Millet shook out his second match and puffed until the pipe bowl glowed
warmly, edge to edge. "Of course I’m serious." He jabbed his pipe at
Walker. "You like your job?"

"It’s a job that has to be done."

Millet smiled and shrugged. "You haven’t really answered my question."

Walker, sensing that he had already lost control of the conversation,
waved his hands in dismissal. "Well, that is not really important. The
fact remains, you did leave Weapons Development at the ... ah ...
request of the government."

"Talk on, talk on—you’ll get to the point eventually. When you’re
through, I’d like to show you around the place. I’m very proud of my
gardens. You’re sort of responsible for them, you know."

Walker set his jaw and bored ahead. "However, at the time you left
government service, you were pursuing certain lines of research—"

Millet leaned back and began laughing, his eyes squinted shut. "Walker,
don’t tell me they want me _back_!"

It seemed his chance to dominate the discussion again. "I don’t think
you’d be allowed back."

"Good," said Millet, looking up, his laughter fading into a smile. "I
was a bit concerned for a moment."

There was silence in the room. Walker began to wish that he were
somewhere else: Millet simply baffled him. He obviously did not care
about his disgrace. Walker felt a resurgence of the old resentment.

Millet’s face suddenly became very kindly. "Perhaps, as a fellow
scientist"—Walker almost winced, and knew, furiously, that his response
had shown—"you would be interested in knowing what I’ve been doing since
my unhappy marriage with bureaucracy ended."

It was a welcome gambit, and Walker accepted it eagerly. "I certainly
would. One of the reasons I came here, as a matter of fact."

Millet waved his pipe. "Good. Afterwards, you can stop beating around
the bush, eh?"

"Yes, of course," mumbled Walker.

"You know," said Millet as he got up and went to a bookcase, "a man’s
got to earn a living. Do much reading?"

"Not these days. Used to." He scratched a cigarette on the sole of his
shoe and inhaled hugely. "Not enough time these days for reading."

Millet reached into the bookcase and came out with a stack of magazines.
"Well, that’s how I make my living." He handed the stack to Walker.
"Writing. Use a pen name of course." He chuckled. "Write
everything—always happiest doing science fiction, though."

Walker flipped through the magazines; he looked up. "Obviously, you’re
doing rather well at it."

"Have been for the last seven or eight years. Lot of fun."

"And this has been your life since you left us?" Walker set the stack of
magazines aside. "Seems a waste of genius, somehow."

"As a matter of fact, this is not my life’s work. As I said, a man’s got
to earn a living. This is just a lucrative hobby that pays the way. You
see, I’ve been involved in an expensive research program."

"Ah." Walker sat forward and smashed out his cigarette. "This may be
important."

"Oh, it is, it is. But not, I am afraid, in the way you mean."

"You can never tell. What have you been doing?"

"Completing a unified theory of life. Why a crystal grows but isn’t
alive, why an organism that dies isn’t like a crystal. What is the
process we call life? What is its relationship to the space-time
continuum—"

He said it so casually that Walker was caught off his guard completely.
"Are you serious, Millet?" he said.

"Certainly. I expect to publish in about two years."

"Is this an independent effort?"

"Not entirely. Others have contributed. Some pioneers long dead, some
among the living." His eyes twinkled. "You see, important things beside
the development of weapons of destruction do continue in the scientific
world. Did you think that was the end of everything for me, ten years
ago?" He shook his head in mock gravity. "It was just the beginning. I
_wanted_ out, you see."

"You wanted out?" Walker leaned forward, unwilling to believe what he
had heard. "Are you trying to tell me that you _arranged_ your
discharge?"

Millet shrugged. "Why, of course. Nobody ever has bothered to ask me
about that up to now, but I certainly did arrange it. It wasn’t hard,
you know. All I had to do was set up some sort of relationship with a
so-called security risk, and I was on my way out."

"Why ... that’s damned near treason."

"Don’t be silly. I had other important things to do. In order to do
them—to continue work on the unified life theory—it was necessary for me
to contact scientists with whom professional relationships were made
illegal by security regulations. The choice was simple; besides, I
didn’t enjoy the idea of spending my life developing ways of destroying
the very thing I wanted most to understand."

"This is fantastic, Millet, utterly fantastic."

"But true nonetheless. Walker, you look like you could use a drink."

"By all means." He stared emptily into the air, thinking about the good
old days.

"Walker, a toast," said Millet, holding a tall glass out to him. "To
scientific freedom."

Walker blinked. "By all means," he repeated hoarsely, and there was a
blurriness to his vision. "To scientific freedom."

They drank, and Walker said: "I feel a bit freer to say what I have come
for."

"Shoot," nodded Millet, sipping his drink.

"For security reasons, I’ll talk in generalities. But the basic fact is,
United Terra is faced with a serious situation. It is most desirable
that the research you were conducting when you left us, be continued."

"There are a lot of other capable physicists, both eager to be a part of
such activity and blessed with security clearances."

"You know very well, Millet, that this was an unique, almost independent
line of development that comes to a stop in your brain. Besides," and
suddenly he felt silly, "the lines of communication for research which
might enable us to pick up where you left off, in time—too much time—are
somewhat entangled in security." He glared. "Don’t laugh, Millet; it’s a
fact of life which must be faced."

Millet finished his drink and set the glass on an end table. "What
you’re doing is asking me to come back if you can arrange it."

Walker spread his hands. "Dr. Millet, you have put it in a nutshell."

Millet shook his head, and for the first time since their conversation
had started he frowned. "Walker, you know how I feel about developing
weapons. I’m just plain opposed to it."

"The soldier is opposed to losing his life, but many have to do just
that in the interests of civilization."

"That serious, eh?"

Walker crumpled under the weight of his fear. "That serious," he said
wearily.

Millet thoughtfully relit his pipe. "Of course, I’m not at all sure that
United Terra is very right in this thing."

"In times like these, that kind of thought is out of bounds," snapped
Walker. "Whether you like it or not, you are a part of this culture. You
might disapprove of many things in it, but you don’t want to see it
fall."

Millet puffed gently. "No, I suppose not." Again the frown flickered
across his face. "I’ve been very happy. I don’t want my work
interrupted. It’s too important, Walker."

"Undoubtedly this would more than interrupt your work. It would replace
it."

Millet’s eyes drifted affectionately about the room. "Most unpleasant."
A smile curled his lips. "Frankly, though, I don’t think you can clear
me again."

"My problem."

"Indeed." A weary resignation seemed to settle over Millet, and Walker
suddenly felt very miserable. "I suppose I’ll have to accept," Millet
said, pulling his pipe out of his mouth and staring unhappily at its
trail of smoke.

                                  ————

Walker put his hands flat on his desk and sighed deeply. Some of the
pressure, at least, was off; he had managed to cancel part of the
Confederation’s advantage. Terran industrial strength and technological
supremacy, coupled with Millet’s genius, might yet equate, or at least
circumvent, the frightful weapon the Confederation held.

However, he still had to get Millet back into the government. Though, on
the basis of the information he had gained regarding the scientist’s
motivations, and considering the critical nature of the situation, it
shouldn’t be too difficult.

He clicked on his video and dialed a secret line into Security Data.
Gyrating colors danced across the screen before it went black. He
scowled, depressed the cancel button, and dialed again; this time, the
black was finally replaced by a recorded image, which said, sweetly out
of pouting red lips,

"This line is not cleared for the Security Information you seek. The
problem you are handling should be routed through an individual
permitted access to this information." The image faded into blackness,
the sound track into static.

Walker stared, stupefied. No line, no contact, no source of information
had been denied to him in over twelve years.

His door swung open; he came to his feet abruptly, furious that someone
should enter unannounced.

He felt sickness strike him like a fist in the stomach: Meriwether,
flanked by two security guards, pushed through the door. His voice
slashed across the office like a broadsword.

"Walker, I’m shocked. Shocked. And at a time like this...."

Walker pounded his desk. "What the hell is going on? I can’t get
Security Data, you come marching in here with security men ... what
gives?"

Meriwether gestured to the guards, and they came forward and each took
one of Walker’s arms. "You’re out of a job, Walker," snarled General
Marcus Meriwether.

"In the name of God, _why_?"

"You know very well. Take him to security detention, Sergeant."

And suddenly he knew. Meriwether stared indignantly when he started
laughing. It was a hell of a thing to laugh at, but it was also the most
hilarious tragedy he ever hoped to encounter.

Millet. _Security risk._ Untouchable.

Millet would finish his great unified theory, and go down in history as
neither Walker nor Meriwether nor the genius who invented the
Confederation’s neural weapon would. Millet was as safe as he could
possibly want to be.

And so was the Interplanetary Confederation.


                                 *END*


Transcribers note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction February 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY RISK ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/35759

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away – you may do practically _anything_ with public domain
eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
