The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Coal From The Altar, To Kindle The Holy
Fire of Zeale, by Samuel Ward

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Coal From The Altar, To Kindle The Holy Fire of Zeale
       In a Sermon Preached at a Generall Visitation at Ipswich

Author: Samuel Ward

Release Date: August 3, 2005 [EBook #16423]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COAL FROM THE ALTAR, TO ***




Produced by Jordan Dohms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











A COAL FROM THE ALTAR,
TO KINDLE THE holy fire of _Zeale_.

In a Sermon preached at a generall _Visitation at Ipswich._

By SAM WARD Bach. of Divinity.

_The third Edition, corrected and much amended._

[Greek: Theô kai humin]

_LONDON_,

Printed by _E.G._ for _Joyce Macham_, widow; and are to bee sold in
Pauls Church yard, at the signe of _Time_, 1628





To my reverend Friend Mr. SAMUEL WARD.

_Sir, your Sermon which I copied partly from your mouth, and partly from
your notes, I have adventured into the light; encouraged by the
approbation, and earnest entreaty of such, whose judgements you
reverence, and whose love you embrace: who also have made bolde heere
and there to varie some things, not of any great consequence, if I can
judge. I was loth to smoother such fire in my brest; but to vent it, to
enflame others. If you shall blame me, I know others will thanke mee.
What I have done, is out of Zeale to God and his Church._

Your affectionate friend,

_Ambrose Wood._





Revel. 3. 19. _Be zealous._

[Sidenote: Mat. 24. 12.]

[Sidenote: 1 Kin. 1. 1.]

This watch-word of Christ, if it be not now a word in season, I know not
when ever it was, or will bee: Would he now vouchsafe to bestow a letter
upon his Church heere on earth; should hee need to alter the tenour of
this? which being the last, to the last of the seaven Churches, why may
it not (saith an Ancient, upon this text) typifie the estate of the last
Age of his Churches? the coldnesse whereof himselfe hath expressely
foretolde. And if God should now send through he earth such surveying
Angels as _Zacharie_ mentions, chapter 1. Could they returne any other
observation of their travailes then theirs; _The whole world lies in
lukewarmnesse?_ which makes mee often in my thoughts proportion these
ends of time, to the like period of _Davids_ age, when no cloathes were
enough to keepe heare in him. _Faith_ I grant is a more radicall,
vitall, and necessary grace; but yet not so wholly out of _grace_ with
the times, as poore _Zeale_; which yet if by any meanes it might once
againe be reduced into favour and practice, before Time sets, and bee no
more; I doubt not but Christ would also yet once againe in this evening
of the world, come and _Sup_ with us; A favour including all other in
it.

[Sidenote: 2]

My desire especially is, that this our Iland might take it to it selfe,
as well as if it had by name beene directed to it; what would it hurt us
to make an especiall benefit and use of it? Some of our owne, have so
applyed it; (whether out of their judgements, or affections, I say not.)
Learned _Fulk_ marvels if it were not by a Propheticall spirit penned
for us: others more resolutely have made it a singular type of purpose
for us. Their warrant I know not; especially if it bee true which all
travellers tell you, _That they finde more zeale at home then abroad._
We are I grant in sundry respects equall to _Laodicea_: Even the very
names thereof, as well the first and oldest in regard of the blessings
of God, [Greek: Dios polis] Gods Darling, as the later in regard of good
Lawes and Civility, _Laodicea_, How well doe they become us? As rich as
they, and that in the very same commodity of woolls; _Abounding as they_
with many learned _Zenoes_ & bountifull _Hieroes_; _Parallel_ in all
regards; I would I could say lukewarmnesse excepted. But I must bee a
faithfull and true witnesse, and yet this is all I have to say; It was,
as I conceive, _Laodicea's_ complexion and not her constitution, her
practice not her orders, personall lukewarmnesse not legall, which
Christ strikes at. That fault I finde in my text, the same I finde in
our common Christians, whose spirituall condition, and state is too
like the externall situation of our Country, between the Torrid, and the
Frigid Zones; neither hot nor colde: and so like _Laodicea_, that if wee
take not warning, or warming, we may, I feare, in time come to be spued
out of Gods mouth.

[Sidenote: 3]

For this present assembly of Ministers, could all the choice and time in
the world have better fitted mee then mine ordinarie Lot? If fire bee
set upon the Beacons, will not the whole Countrey soone be warned and
enlightned?

[Sidenote: 4]

For my selfe also, mee thinkes it will better beseeme my yeeres to heat,
then to teach my Ancients; to enkindle their affections, then to enforme
their judgements. And whereas _Paul_ bids _Titus_ preach zeale with all
authoritie; though in mine owne name I crave your patience, and
audience, yet in his name that is the first of the creatures, and
_Amen_, I counsell him that hath an eare, to heare what the Spirit saith
to the Churches;

[Greek: Zêlôson], _Be Zealous._





_A Coale from the Altar._


Revel. 3.19. [Greek: Zêlôson]: _Be Zealous._

Zeale hath been little practized, lesse studied: this heavenly fire hath
ever beene a stranger upon earth. Few in all ages that have felt the
heat of it, fewer that have knowne the nature of it. A description will
rake it out of the embers of obscurity: and it may be that many when
they shall know it better, will better affect it.

2. Zeale hath many counterfets and allies. There are many strange fires
which having sought to carry away the credit of it, have brought in an
ill name upon it: from these it would bee distinguished.

3. Zeale is every where spoken against it hath many enemies and few
friends: the world can no more abide it, then beasts can the elementary
fire, the rebukes of many have falne upon it, the Divell weaves cunning
lies to bring downe the honour of it. Oh that wee could raise and
maintaine it, by setting forth the deserved praise of it; and challenge
it from the false imputations of such as hate it without a cause.

4. Zeale hath in this our earthly molde, little fuell, much quench-coale,
is hardly fired, soone cooled. A good Christian therefore would bee glad
to know the Incentives and preservatives of it, which might enkindle it,
enflame it, feed it, and revive it when it is going out.

5. Zeale in the worlds opinion, is as common as fire on every mans
hearth, no mans heart without zeale, if every man might be his owne
judge; If most might be heard there is too much of it; but the contrary
will appear if the right markes bee taken, and the true rules of triall
and conviction bee observed, and the heart thereby examined.

6. Zeale generally handled will break as lightning in the aire, and seize
upon no subject: Application must set it on mens harts, and exhortation
warme this old and colde age of the world, chiefly this temperate
climate of our nation.


_First Part_.

It was sayd of olde, that zeale was an _Intension of love_: of late,
that it is a compound of _love and anger, or indignation_.

The Ancients aimed right, and shot neere, if not somwhat with the
shortest. The moderne well discovered the use and exercise of more
affections, then love, within the fathome and compasse of zeale; but in
helping that default, went themselves somewhat wide, and came not close
to the marke: which I ascribe not to any defect of eye-sight in those
sharpe sighted Eagles; but onely to the want of fixed contemplation. And
to speake truth, I have oft wondered why poore _Zeale_, a vertue so high
in Gods books, could never be so much beholding to mens writings as to
obtain a just treatise, which hath beene the lot of many particular
vertues of inferiour worth; a plaine signe of too much under-value and
neglect.

Hee that shall stedfastly view it, shall finde it not to bee a degree or
intension of love, or any single affection (as the _Schooles_ rather
confined then defined zeale) neither yet any mixt affection (as the
later, rather compounded then comprehended the nature of it) but an _hot
temper, higher degree or intension of them all_. As varnish is no one
color, but that which gives glosse & lustre to all; So the opposites of
zeale, key-coldnes and lukewarmnesse, which by the Law of contraries
must bee of the same nature, are no affections, but severall tempers of
them all.

[Sidenote: Acts 26. 7.]

_Paul_ warrants this description where hee speakes of the twelve Tribes.
_They served God with intension or vehemency_.

The roote shewes the nature of the branch. Zeale comes of [Greek: zô],
a word framed of the very sound and hissing noise, which hot coales or
burning iron make when they meete with their contrary. In plaine
English, zeale is nothing but heate: from whence it is, that zealous men
are oft in Scripture sayd to burne in the spirit. [Greek: zeontes
pneumati].

Hee that doth moderately or remisly affect any thing, may be stiled
_Philemon_, a lover; he that earnestly or extreamely, _Zelotes_, a
zelot; who to all the objects of his affections, is excessively and
passionately disposed, his love is ever fervent, his desires eager, his
delights ravishing, his hopes longing, his hatred deadly, his anger
fierce, his greefe deep, his feare terrible. The Hebrewes expresse these
Intensions by doubling the word. This being the nature of zeale in
generall, Christian zeale of which wee desire onely to speake, differs
from carnall and worldly, chiefly in the causes and objects.

It is a spirituall heate wrought in the heart of man by the holy Ghost,
improoving the good affections of love, joy, hope, &c. for the best
service and furtherance of Gods glory, with all the appurtenances
thereof, his word, his house, his Saints and salvation of soules: using
the contrarie of hatred, anger, greefe, &c as so many mastives to flie
upon the throat of Gods enemies, the Divell, his Angels, sinne, the
world with the lusts thereof. By the vertue wherof a _Zealot_ may runne
through all his affections, and with _David_, breath zeale out of every
pipe, after this manner for a taste;

[Sidenote: Psalme Love.]

_How doe I love thy Law (O Lord) more then the hony or the hony-combe,
more then thousands of silver and gold!_

[Sidenote: Hatred.]

_Thine enemies I hate with a perfect hatred._

[Sidenote: Joy.]

_Thy testimonies are my delight: I rejoyce more in them, then they that
finde great spoyles, more then in my appoynted food._

[Sidenote: Grief.]

_Mine eyes gush out rivers of teares. Oh that my head were a fountain of
teares, because they destroy thy Law._

[Sidenote: Hope.]

_Mine eyes are dimme with wayting: how doe I long for thy salvation?_

[Sidenote: Feare.]

_Thy judgements are terrible, I tremble and quake, etc._

Look what pitch of affection the naturall man bestowes upon his dearest
darling, what unsatiable thirst the covetous worldling upon his Mammon,
the ambitious upon his honour, the voluptuous upon his pleasure; the
same the Christian striveth in equall, yea, (if possible) farre
exceeding tearmes to convert and conferre upon God and his worship.

In briefe, to open a little crevise of further light, and to give a
little glimpse of heat: Zeale is to the soule, that which the spirits
are to the bodie; wine to the spirits, putting vigour and agility into
them. Whence comes that elegant Antithesis in the Scripture. _Bee not
drunke with wine wherein is excesse, but be filled with the Spirit._

[Sidenote: Ser. 41. in Can. 49.]

[Sidenote: Acts 2.]

Christ is sayd to lead his Spouse into the wine-cellar: which Simily
_Bernard_ delighting oft to repeat, in two or three Sermons interprets
of a speciall measure of zeale inspired into his Church. Thus (saith
hee) Christ led his Disciples into the wine cellar on the day of
Pentecost; and filled them, and the house with such zeale as they came
forth like Giants refreshed with wine, and seemed to the people as men
drunke with new wine.

[Sidenote: Heb. 1. 7.]

It is to the soule, as wings to the foule: this also is a Scripture
embleme to picture the Angels with wings, as in the hangings of the
Temple, and in the visions of the revelation, in token of their ardent
and zealous execution of Gods will: whence also they have their name
_Seraphim_; hee maketh his ministers a flame of fire.

To this fire and these wings, which we in the Lords prayer desire to
imitate, there is nothing in us answerable but our zeale; as wheeles to
the charriot: which makes us not goe, but runne the wayes of Gods
Commandements, and so runne that we may obtaine. As sailes to the ship,
and winde to the sailes, to which alludes the phrase so frequent in
Scripture, _Plerophorie_.

As courage to the souldier, mettle to the horse, dust to the ground,
which makes it bring forth much fruit, yea an hundredfold: vivacity to
all creatures. To conclude this, this is that celestiall fire which was
shadowed out unto us by that poore element in comparison, and beggarly
rudiment, the fire (I meane) of such necessary use in the law, which
rather then it should be wanting, the Lord caused it to descend from
heaven, that it might cause the Sacrifices to ascend thither againe, as
a sweet incense unto the Lord, without which no burnt offering was
acceptable.


_The Second Part._

But now, as then, there are certaine false fires, abhominable to God,
odious to men, dangerous to the _Nadabs_ and _Abihues_ that meddle with
them, bringing thereby coales upon their owne heads, & ill favor upon
all their services; & not onely so, but that which is worse, an ill
report and surmize even on those that offer the right fire, & serve the
Lord in spirit and truth: yet for their sakes is the name of zeale
blasphemed all the day long.

Against these, as then, so now severe caveats and cleere distinctions
must bee laid, lest such as have not their senses exercised to put a
difference, mistake poysonfull weedes for wholesome hearbes, to their
owne destruction; and for the sake of the one, revile the other to the
wrong of God and his Saints.

It fares not otherwise with the soule then with the body: besides the
native & radicall heat, the principall instrument of life, there are
aguish and distempered heats, the causes of sicknesse and death.

To discerne of those, requires some skill and judgement: yet a good
Empirick, a Christian of experience will give a shrewd ghesse at them,
the easier & the better if he marke these following signes and
symptomes, common to all the kinds of false zeale, here also following.

[Sidenote: 1 Ostentation.]

First, they are deeply sicke of the pharisaicall humor, they love to be
seene of men, and say with _Jehu, Come and see how zealous I am for the
Lord of hosts_: they proclaime their almes with a trumpet, paint their
good deedes upon Church windowes, engrave their legacies upon tombes,
have their acts upon record: Thus, Comets blaze more then fixed Starres.
Aguish heats breede flushings, & are more seen in the face, then natural
warmth at the heart. Schollers count hiding of Art the best Art: the
godly man studies by all meanes how to conceale the one hand from the
other, in doing well; hiding of zeale is the best zeale.

Secondly, of _Ahabs_ disease exceeding in externall humiliation,
affected gestures, passionate sighes, lowdnesse of voyce, odde attires &
such like: These know how to rend the garment, hang the head with the
bulrush, to whip and launce their skinnes with _Baals_ Priests; and yet
strangers to a wounded spirit: not but that true and hearty zeale doth
lift up the eyes, knocke the breast, dance before the Arke. Therefore
this character may deceive the unwarie; Let _Ely_ take heede of judging
_Hanna's_ Spirit rashly by the mooving of her lips: yet hypocrites so
usually straine nature and without a cause exceed, and that in publique,
and upon the stage, that for the most part, their actions and affections
are palpable: as _Jesuites, Cappuchins_, &c. yea in many histrionicall
Protestants: Horse-coursers jades will bound, curvet and shew more
tricks, then a horse well mettled for the rode or cart.

[Sidenote: 3 Complementall.]

Thirdly, you may know them by their diligence and curiositie in lighter
matters joyned with omission and neglect of greater, wise in
circumstance, and carelesse in substance, tithing mint, straining at
gnats, &c. In all cheape and easie duties, prodigall: niggardly &
slothfull in the waighty things of the Law: these have at command good
words, countenance, yea teares from their eyes, sooner then a farthing
from their purse, having this worlds goods, and see their brother want;
these sticke up feathers for the carcasse, beguiling the simple,
couzening the world, but cheefly themselves.

[Sidenote: 4 Pragmaticall.]

[Sidenote: 5 Censorious.]

[Sidenote: 6 Cruell.]

Fourthly, these fires cannot keepe themselves within their owne hearths,
these spirits cannot keepe themselves within their owne circles. True
zeale loves to keepe home, studieth to bee quiet in other mens Dioces:
false zeale loves to be gadding, is eagle-ey'd abroad and mole-ey'd at
home: Insteed of burning bright and shining cleere; like brinish lights,
they sparkle & spet at others, or like ill couched fire-workes let fly
on all sides: onely out of their wisdome they know how to spare _Agag_
and the great ones, and bee sure they anger not their great Masters, and
meddle with their matches: whereas it is the property of fire that comes
from above, to spare the yeelding sheath, and melt the resisting
mettall, to passe by the lower roofes, and strike the towred pinacle, as
_Nathan, David; Elias, Ahab; John, Herod; Jonas, Ninivie; &c._ Note
also in all their proceeding with others, in steede of wholesome
severity (which rightly zealous men never come unto but by compulsion,
and not without compassion of the offender, weeping with _Moses_ and
_Samuel_ over the people, beeing sory with the Emperour, that they know
how to write sentences of condemnation) These delight in cruelty, the
brand of the Malignant Church; feede their eyes with Massacres, as the
Queene-mother. No diet so pleasing to these ravening wolves, as the
warme blood of the sheepe. These are they that cry fire and fagot, away
with them, not worthy to live, their very mercies are cruelty:
especially in their owne cause, they heat the fornace seaven times
hotter then in Gods.

[Sidenote: 7 Variable and inconstant.]

Lastly, these Meteors and Vapours have no constant light, or continued
heat (as the fixed starres ever like themselves) but have onely their
aguish fits, & lunatick moods; sometimes in adversity they are good
under the rod, as _Pharaoh_, againe in prosperity like the fat kine of
_Bashan_, ingratefull and forgetfull: sometimes in prosperity when the
sunne of peace shineth on them, & the favourable influence of great
ones, they shoot foorth their blade with the corne on the house top,
running with the streame, & sayling with the winde; sometimes their
zeale depends upon the life of _Jehoiada_; sometimes on the company of
the Prophets: commonly in the beginning they blaze like straw-fire, but
in the end goe out in smoake and smother; whereas in their entrance into
profession, they galloped into shewes, and made some girds at hand, they
tire, give in, and end in the flesh, whereas all naturall motions are
swiftest toward their end.

[Sidenote: Be not over just hath 7. expositions heere 2. or 3. more
hereafter.]

The vestall fires were perpetuall, and the fire of the Altar never went
out. Spices and wefts of these evills may bee found in the sincerest
Christians: but they suffer not these dead flies to lie and putrefie in
the precious boxes of true zeale; of all these the Preachers caveat may
be construed, _Be not over just_, though it may also admit other
interpretations, as after shall appeare.

These are the speciall notes and symptomes of strange fires: the kinds
also are many, and might be distributed into many heads; but I will
reduce them into three, which are known by their names. [Greek:
pseudozêlos], _counterfet Zeale, false fire_. [Greek: tuphlos zêlos]
_blinde Zeale, smoakie fire, or fooles fire, ignis fatuus_. [Greek:
pikros zêlos], _turbulent Zeale, wilde fire_.

The first, wanting truth and sincerity, propounds sinister ends.

The second, knowledge and discretion, takes wrong wayes.

The third, love and humility, exceeds measure.

The first abounds amongst subtile & crafty professours, and is to be
abhorred and detected.

The second among simple & devout, is to be pitied and directed.

The third amongst passionate and affectionate, and is to bee moderated
and corrected.

The first is the meere vizor of zeale, looking asquint one way and
tending another; pretending God and his glory, intending some private
and sinister end; first, either of honour and promotion, as _Jehu_, who
marched furiously, and his word was the Lord of hosts, but his project
was the kingdome.

Secondly, at filthy lucre: as _Demetrius_ and his followers, who cried
great is _Diana_ of Ephesus; but meant her little silver shrines. It
cannot bee denied, but many such there were, who helped to pull downe
the Abbyes; not out of any hatred to those uncleane cages, but to reare
their owne houses out of the ruines, and spoyled copes to make cushions.
_Judas_ complained of superfluity, but greeved it fell besides his bag:
many hold temporalities tithes and glebes, unlawfull, because they are
loth to forgo them: If _Jezebel_ proclaime a Fast, let _Naboth_ looke to
his vine-yard; If the Usurer & Trades-man frequent Sermons, let the
buyer & borrower look to themselves. It is too common a thing to make
zeale a lure & stale, to draw customers; a bait of fraud, a net to
entrap; with malicious _Doegs_, to make it a stalking horse for revenge
against the Priest, thereby to discharge their gall at Ministers and
other Christians, for the omission and commission of such things, as
themselves care not for; with the _Strumpet_ in the Proverbs, to wipe
their mouthes, and frequent the Sacrifices, that they may be free from
suspicion.

All these evils, have I seene under the sunne-shine of the Gospell: but
by how much, zeale is more glorious then common profession, by so much
is dissembled fervency more detestable then usuall hypocrisie; yea, no
better then divellish villany & double iniquity: such painted walles and
whited sepulchers, the Lord will breake downe. Let all _Timothies_ &
_Nathanaels_ learne to descry them, and discard them: The cure of this
was deepely forelayd by Christ; _I counsell thee to buy gold tried in
the fire_: all is not gold that glistereth, an image of faith breeds but
a shew of zeale; many seemed to trust in Christ, but Christ would not
trust them: but such faith as will abide the fire, brings foorth zeale
that will abide the touch-stone.

[Sidenote: [Greek: kakozêlia].]

The second is erroneous or blinde zeale, not according to knowledge,
Rom. 10. I beare many devout Papists witnesse (though I feare the
learnedst of them be selfe-condemned) that they have this zeale,
perswading themselves they doe God best service, when they please
the Divell most in their will-worship. The same witnesse I
beare many _Seperatists_; though I feare most of them be sicke of
selfe-conceitednesse, newfanglenesse, and desire of mastership: for who
would not suspect such zeale, which condemnes all reformed Churches,
and refuseth communion with such as they themselves confesse to bee
Christians, and consequentely such as have communion with Christ? It
would greeve a man indeede, to see zeale misplaced, like mettle in a
blinde horse; to see men take such paines, and yet fall into the pit.
This made _Paul_ to wish himselfe _Anathema_, for the sake of such; and
yet the multitude and common people, reason thus; Is it possible but
these men have the right? But alas, how should it bee otherwise, when a
blinde company will follow a blinde sect-master; This being one property
of blinde zeale, a fond admiration and apish imitation of some person,
for some excellency they see in him, which so dazles their eyes, that
they cannot discerne their errours and infirmities, which they oftner
inherit then their vertues; as appeares in the _Lutherans_ and the
Jewes, that would sacrifice their children to _Molech_, in imitation of
_Abraham_: In these the Divell becomes an Angell of light, and playeth
that Dragon, Revel. 12. powring out flouds of persecution against the
Church, causing devout men and women, to raise tragedies, breath out
threatnings, and persecute without measure; then these the Divell hath
no better soldiers: but when their scales fall from their eyes, and they
come into Gods tents; God hath none like unto them. The cure of this
divinely is forelayd by Christ also, to buy eye-salve of him; Angells
have eyes as well as wings to guide their flight: when the ship is under
saile, and hath the freshest way; it hath most neede to looke to the
sterage, keep the watch, have an eye to the Compasse and land-marks.

The third kinde is turbulent zeale, called by _James_ bitter zeale, a
kinde of wilde-fire transporting men beyond all bounds and compasse of
moderation; proceeding sometime of a weaknesse of nature in men, that
have no stay of their passion, like to Clockes whose springs are broken,
and Cities whose walls are down. Zeale is a good servant, but an ill
master: mettle is dangerous in a head-strong horse. And so the Poets
(which were the Heathens Prophets) shadowed out the cure of this, in
_Minerva's_ golden bridle, wherewith she menaged her winged _Pegasus_.
There is too much of this bitter zeale, of this _Hierapicra_ in all our
bookes of controversies: but especially there hath been too much in our
domesticall warrs; some sonns of _Bichri_ have blowen the trumpet of
contention, trumpets of anger; the Churches of God should have no such
custome: Oh that our Churches understood that saying.

[Sidenote: Rom. 14. 10.]

In quarrells of this nature _Paul_ spends his zeale, not in partaking
but in parting the fray, beating downe the weapons on both sides: Who
art thou that judgest? who art thou that condemnest thy brother? as if
hee should say, The matters are not _Tanti_, wee have made the Divell
too much sport already; who threw in these bones to set us together by
the eares, whilst hee lets in the common Enemy upon us. _Charitie,
Charitie_, is the builder of Churches: Strife about trifles, hath wasted
many famous ones, and placed the temples of _Mahomet_, where the golden
candle-sticke was wont to stand. Wee pitty the former ages, contending
about leavened and unleavened bread, keeping of Easter, fasting on
Sundayes, &c. The future ages, will do the like for us. Oh that the
Lord would put into the hearts both of the governours & parties to these
quarrells, once to make an end of these Midianitish warrs; that wee
might joyntly powre out the vialls of our zeale upon the throne of the
beast.

Thus have you heard the errors and counterfets of zeale, through whose
sides, and upon the backe of which, divers of the malicious world use to
beat those whom it hates, because their workes are better then their
owne; injuriously concluding, that all Zelots are alike. Thus I have
heard our Marchants complaine, that the set up blewes have made
strangers loath the rich oaded blewes, onely in request; this is an olde
sophisme. True judgement would teach us to conclude, that the best
druggs have their adulterates; the most current coins their slipps; and
that vertue which so many hypocrites put on, to grace themselves
withall; is surely some rare and excellent jewell.


_The third part._

The true Zelot, whose fervency is in the spirit, not in shew; in
substance not in circumstance; for God, not himselfe; guided by the
word, not with humours; tempered with charity, not with bitternesse:
such a mans praise is of God though not of men: such a mans worth cannot
bee set foorth with the tongues of men and Angells.

[Sidenote: Arguments of commendation.]

Oh that I had so much zeale, as to steep it in it owne liquour; to set
it forth in it owne colours, that the Lord would touch my tongue with a
coale from his Altar, that I might regaine the decayed credit of it,
with the sons of men.

[Sidenote: 1. From God's excellency whom zeale only becomes unworthily
placed elsewhere.]

It is good to bee zealous in a good things: and is it not best, in the
best? or is there any better then God, or the kingdome of heaven? Is it
comely what ever we do, to do it with all our might? onely uncomely when
wee serve God? Is meane and mediocrity, in all excellent Arts excluded,
and onely to be admitted in religion? Were it not better to forbeare
_Poetry_ or _Painting_, then to rime or dawbe? and were it not better to
bee of no religion, then to be colde or lukewarme in any? Is it good to
be earnest for a friend, & cold for the Lord of hosts? For whom doest
thou reserve the top of thy affections? for thy gold? for thy
_Herodias_, &c. O yee adulterers and adultresses, can yee offer God a
baser indignity? What ayleth the world? Is it afrayd thinke we, that God
can have too much love; who in regard of his owne infinite beauty, & the
beames he vouchsafeth to cast upon us, deserves the best, yea all, and a
thousand times more then all? Ought not all the springs and brookes of
our affection, to runne into this Maine? may not hee justly disdaine,
that the least Riveret should bee drained another way? that any thing in
the world should bee respected before him, equalled with him, or loved
out of him, of whom, for whom, and through whom are all things? Who, or
what can bee sufficient for him our Maker and Saviour? In other objects
feare excesse: here no extasie is high enough.

[Sidenote: 2. From his spirituall nature.]

Consider and reason thus with thy selfe (O man) canst thou brooke a
sluggard in thy worke, if thou bee of any spirit thy selfe? is not a
slothfull messenger as vinegar to thy teeth, and as smoake to thine
eyes? Hast thou any sharpnesse of wit, is not dulnesse tedious unto
thee? And shall hee that is all spirit (for whom the Angels are slow and
colde enough) take pleasure in thy drowzie and heavie service? Doe men
choose the forwardest Deere in the heard, and the liveliest Colt in the
drove? and is the backwardest man fittest for God? Is not all his
delight in the quickest and cheerefullest givers and servitors? Even to
_Judas_ he saith, That thou doest, doe quickely; so odious is dulnesse
unto him: what else mooved him to ordaine, that the necke of the
consecrated Asse should bee broken, rather then offered up in sacrifice;
doth God hate the Asse? Or is it not for the sake of the quality of the
creature; which hath ever among the Heathens beene an _Hieroglyphick_ of
heavinesse and tardity?

[Sidenote: 3. Effects of zeale. Revel. 12.]

[Sidenote: Opus operatum.]

Thirdly, this zeale is so gracious a favorite with God, that it graces
with him all the rest of his graces. Prayer if it bee fervent,
prevaileth much: the zealous witnesses had power to shut and open
heaven: by this, _Israel_ wrastled with God, overcame, and was called a
Prince with God: this strengthned the heart of _Moses_ (as _Aaron_ and
_Hur_ supported his hands) till the Lord sayd, Let me alone: this made
_Cornelius_ his prayer to come into heaven; whither our colde sutes can
no more ascend, then vapours from the Still, unlesse there bee fire
under it: Repentance, a needefull and primary grace, which the Baptist
so urged: but then wee must bee zealous and repent (as my text joynes
them) or else no repentance pleaseth God; nor are there fruits worthy
repentance. Almes and good deeds are sacrifices pleasing to God; but
without zeale, the widowes mites are no better then the rest; It is the
cheerefull loose, that doubleth the gift. Generally, as some mans marke
and name, furthereth the sale of his commodity; so zeale inhanceth all
the graces of God. It pittieth me for _Laodicea_ that lost so much cost;
had as many vertues, did as many duties as other Churches: but for want
of this, Christ could not sup with them. Furnish a table with the
principallest fare, and daintiest dishes that may be had; let them be
rosted & boyled to the halves, or stand on the table till they bee
lukewarme; what will the guests say? All that we can doe is but the
deede done, unlesse zeale conferre grace.

[Sidenote: 4. Baptismus Flaminis & Fluminis.]

Fourthly, zeale is the richest evidence of faith, and the cleerest
demonstration of the Spirit: The Baptisme of water, is but a cold proofe
of a mans Christendome; being common to all commers: but if any bee
baptized with fire, the same is sealed up to the day of Redemption. If
any shall say, friend, what doest thou professe a religion without it;
how can hee choose but bee strucke dumb? Can wee suppose worme-wood
without bitternesse, a man without reason? then may wee imagine a
religion, and a Christian, without spirit and zeale.

The Jesuite saith, I am zealous; the Separatist, I am zealous; their
plea is more probable, then the lukewarme worldlings, that serve God
without life. If the colour bee pale and wan, and the motion insensible,
the party is dead or in a swoune; if good and swift, wee make no
question. The zealous Christian is never to seeke for a proofe of his
salvation: what makes one Christian differ from another in grace, as
starrs doe in glory; but zeale? All beleevers have a like precious
faith: All true Christians have all graces in their seedes; but the
degrees of them are no way better discerned then by zeale: Men of place
distinguish themselves, by glistering pearles: A Christian of degrees
shines above other in zeale. Comparisons I know are odious to the world,
that faine would have all alike: but the righteous is better then his
neighbour: All Christians are the excellent of the earth, the Zelot
surmounteth them all, as _Saul_ the people by the head and shoulders;
hee is ever striving to excell and exceeds others and himselfe.

One of these is worth a thousand others, one doth the worke of many:
which made him speake of _Elisha_ in the plurall number, _The horsemen
and Charriots of Israel_; besides his owne worke, hee winns and procures
others, makes Proselytes. It is the nature of fire to multiply, one
coale kindles another: his worke so shines, that others come in and
glorifie God; marvelling and enquiring what such forwardnesse should
meane, concluding with _Nebuchadnezzar, Surely the servants of the most
high God._

These are good Factors and Agents, doing God as good service, as
Boutesewes doe the Divell, and Jesuites the Pope, sparing no cost, nor
labour; and what they cannot doe themselves, they doe by their friends,
_Who is on my side, who? &c._

As for lets and impediments, they over-looke and over-leape them, as
fire passeth from one house to another; neither is there any standing
for any Gods enemies before them: they make havock of their owne and
others corruptions. If you will rightly conceive of _Peters_ zeale in
converting & confounding, you must imagine (saith _Chrysostome_) a man
made all of fire walking in stubble. All difficulties are but whetstones
of their fortitude. The sluggard saith, _There is a Lyon in the way_;
tell _Samson_ & _David_ so, they will the rather goe out to meet them.
Tell _Nehemiah of Samballat_, hee answereth, _Shall such a man as I
feare?_ Tell _Caleb_ there are _Anakims_, and hee will say, _Let us goe
upp at once, &c_. Let _Agabus_ put off his girdle and binde _Paul_, let
him be told in every City, that bonds await him, hee is not onely ready
for bonds, but for death; tell _Jubentius_, hee must lay downe his life,
he is as willing as to lay off his clothes: tell _Luther_ of enemies in
_Wormes_, hee will goe if all the tiles of the houses were Divells. The
horse neighs at the trumpet; the Leviathan laughs at the speare. They
that meane to take the Kingdome of God by violence, provide themselves
to goe through fire and water, carry their lives in their hands,
embrace faggots; they say to father and mother, _I know you not_: to
carnall Counsellers and friendly enemies, _Get you behinde mee Sathan._
Zeale is as strong as death, hot as the coales of Juniper; flouds of
many waters cannot quench it. _Agar_, Pro. 30. speakes of foure things,
stately in their kinde; I will make bold to add a fift, comprehending
and excelling them all namely the zealous Christian, strong and bold as
the Lyon; not turning his head for any; as swift as the grey-hound in
the waies of Gods commandements; in the race to heaven, as nimble as the
Goat climbing the steepe and craggy mountaines of pietie and vertue; A
victorious King, overcoming the world and his lusts: _Salomon_ in all
his royalty, is not cloathed like one of these in his fiery Charriot.

To cut off the infinite praises of zeale, let us heare what honourable
testimonies and glorious rewards, it pleaseth God to conferre upon it;
_Davids_ ruddy complexion and his skill in musique, made him amiable in
the eyes of men: but the zeale of his heart, stiled him a man after Gods
owne heart; and the sweet Singer of Israel. _Abraham_, that could finde
in his heart to sacrifice his _Isaack_, was called the friend of God.
The same vertue denominated _Jacob_ a Prince with God. _Elisha_, The
Charriots and horse-men. _Paul_, A chosen vessell, &c.

[Sidenote: Revel. 12.]

[Sidenote: Revel. 7. 3. Ezek. 9. Exod. 12.]

Neither doth God put them off, with names and empty favours, but upon
these he bestowes his graces: _David_ dedicateth his Psalmes to him that
excelled: God in dispensing of favours, observeth the same rule, to him
that overcommeth will I give, &c, To him that hath, shall bee given.
Husbandmen cast their seede uppon the fertilest ground, which returnes
it with the greatest interest: God gives most talents to those that
improove them in the best banke. _Joseph_ shall have a party coloured
coat, of all kindes of graces and blessings: And because he knowes this
will purchase them hatred and envy, hee takes them into speciall
tuition; if any will hurt his zealous witnesses, there goeth out a fire
out of their mouthes, to devoure their enemies. A man were better anger
all the witches in the world then one of these. If God bring any common
judgements, he sets his seale and _Thau_ on their fore-heads, &
sprinkles their posts; snatcheth _Lot_ out of the fire (who burneth in
zeale, as _Sodome_ in lust) as men doe their plate whiles they let the
baser stuffe burne. In fine, hee taketh _Enoch_ and _Eliah_ in
triumphant Charriots up to heaven, and after their labours and toyles,
setteth them in speciall Thrones, to rest in glory; The Apostles in
their twelve, the rest in their order, according to their zeale. And
though hee may well reckon the best of these, unprofitable servants;
yet such congruity (not of merits, but of favour) it pleaseth him to
observe in crowning his graces, that the most zealous heere, are the
most glorious there.

Who would not now wonder, how ever this royall vertue should have lost
it grace with the world; how ever any should admit a low thought of it?
But what? Shall all the indignity which hell can cast upon it, make it
vile in our eyes? or rather, shall wee not reason from the opposition,
as _Tertullian_ did of _Nero:_ That religion which _Nero_ so persecutes,
must needs be excellent.

[Sidenote: 1 Object. Zeale is madd, and makes men mad.]

[Sidenote: Acts 26. 24 1 Cor.]

If zeale were not some admirable good, the Divell and World would not so
hate it; Yet lest silence should bee thought to baulke some unanswerable
reasons, let us see how they labour to be madd with reason: Let _Festus_
bee the Speaker for the rest, for hee speakes what all the rest thinke;
you know his madd objection, and _Pauls_ sober answer in that place, and
the like, 2 Cor. 5.13. whether hee bee madd or sober, it is for God and
you.

This text bids us bee zealous and repent; the word signifies be wise
againe, or returne to your wits. The prodigall is sayd to come to
himselfe, when he was first heat with this fire. Wee may well answer the
world as old men doe young: You thinke us Christians to bee madd that
follow heaven so eagerly; but we know you to bee madd, that run
a-madding so after vanity.

[Sidenote: Acts. 2.]

[Sidenote: Acts. 7.]

A Christian indeed is never right, till he seeme to the world to be
beside himselfe; Christs owne kindred were afrayd of him. The Apostles
are sayd to be full of new wine; besides, with these the world is madd:
they runn with _Stephan_ like madd men; _Nichodemus_ and such as he,
never offends them.

[Sidenote: 2 Object.]

[Sidenote: A makebate.]

[Sidenote: Tenterden steeple.]

You know also what _Ahab_ laid to the charge of _Eliah_; with the
Apologie hee made for himselfe. This is a stale imputation in ages.
_Haman_ accused _Mordechay_ and the Jewes of it. The Apostles are sayd
to bee troubles of the whole earth. In the Primitive Church all mutinies
and contentions were layd to the Martyrs. True it is, where zeale is,
there is opposition, and so consequently troubles: Christ sets this fire
on earth, not as an author, but by accident: The theefe is the authour
of the fray, though the true man strike never so many blowes: but the
_Ahabs_ of the world, trouble Israel; then, complaine of _Eliah:_ The
Papists will blow upp the State, then father it upon the Puritans. It is
not for any wise man, to beleeve the tythe of the tales and slanders,
which flie abroad of the zealous: Lewd men would fain strike at all
goodnes through their sides.

[Sidenote: 3 Object. Proud.]

You may remember also _Eliabs_ uncharitable censure of _David_, I know
the pride of thine heart. So doe all worldlings measure others by their
owne length; if they see any forwardnesse in the peaceablest spirit,
they ascribe it either to vaine-glory, or covetousnesse; the onely
springs that set their wheeles on going: but of this the knower of the
hearts must judge betweene us.

[Sidenote: 4 Object. They keep no meane.]

When slaundering will not serve, then fall they to glavering, cunningly
glancing at zeale, whiles they commend the golden meane wherein vertue
consists. But Christians, take heede none spoyle you through such
Philosophy; or rather Sopistry: for true Philosophy will tell you that
the meane wherein vertue is placed, is the middle betwixt two kindes,
and not degrees: And it is but meane vertue that loves the meane in
their sense.

[Sidenote: 5 Object. Undiscreet.]

Oh say they, but some discretion would doe well; It is true, but take
withall _Calvins_ caveat to _Melancthon_: That he affect not so the name
of a moderate man, and listen to such Syrens songs, till he lose his
zeale.

I have observed, that which the world miscalls discretion, to eat upp
zeale, as that which they call policy, doth wisdome. As _Joab_ stabbed
_Abner_ under a colour of friendship: Antichrist undermineth Christ, by
pretending to be his Vicar. The feare of overdoing makes most come too
short; of the two extreamities, wee should most feare lukewarmnesse:
rather let your milke boyle over then be raw.

From glavering, they fall to scoffing; yong Saints, will prove but olde
Divels; these hot-spurrs will soone runne themselves out of breath. But
wee say, such were never right bred; such as proove falling starres,
never were ought but meteors; the other never lose light or motion:
spirituall motions may be violent and perpetuall.

When none of these will take, they fal to right downe rayling; these
Puritans, these singular fellowes, &c. unfit for all honest company. I
hope the states Puritan, and the common Puritan bee two creatures. For
with that staffe the multitude beats all that are better then
themselves, & lets fly at all that have any shew of goodnes. But with
that which most call Puritanisme, I desire to worship God. For
singularity, Christs calls for it, and presseth & urgeth it; What
singular thing doe you, or what odde thing doe you? Shall Gods peculiar
people, doe nothing peculiar? The world thinkes it strange, wee runne
not with them into excesses, and doe not as most doe, that wee might
escape derision: Judge you which of these men shall please: I beleeve
none shall ever please Christ, till they appeare odde, strange and
precise men, to the common sort; and yet neede not bee over just neither
Let them that have tender eares stop them against the charmes of the
world, and scornes of _Michol_, unlesse they were wiser: Let him that
hath a right eare, heare what Christ saith to the Churches, _Be
zealous_.


_The fourth part._

[Sidenote: Incentives.]

Yea, but by what meanes shall a Christian attaine this fire, and
maintaine it when he hath gotten it.

Say not in thine heart, What _Prometheus_ shall ascend into heaven and
fetch it thence; thou mayest fetch it thence by thine owne prayer: as
did _Elias_ and the Apostles, men of infirmities as well as thy selfe;
pray continually, and instantly: the Lord that breathed first thy soule
into thee, will also breath on thy soule: I speake not of miraculous
(which was but a type) but of ordinarie inspiration. Prayer and zeale
are as water and ice: mutually producing each other; when it is once
come downe upon thine altar; though no water can quench it, yet must it
bee preserved fresh, by ordinarie fuell; especially the Priests lipps
must keepe it alive.

Sermons are bellowes ordained for this purpose. The word read is of
divine use, but doth not with that motion stirre these coales.

Experience sheweth, the best oration will not so much moove as the
meanest Orator.

After the sparkles once by these meanes kindled, cherish and feede them
by reading the word: Let it dwell richly in thine heart, excite thy
dulnesse by spirituall Hymnes. Love-songs enflame not lust, more, then
the Song of Songs doth zeale: Reade or sing the 119. Psalme; and if thou
beest not zealous, every verse will checke thee in thy throat:
Meditation is another helpe, approoved by _Isaacks_ and _Davids_
practice: An Art lately so taught, as I shall neede onely to poynt at
the choyce theames, suiting and furthering this argument. I need not goe
far to fetch this fire: I may strike it out of every word of this
Epistle to _Laodicea_. Behold the Lord God, especially thy Lord Christ
in his glorious titles and Majesty; for so hee beginnes his visions to
_John_; and his Epistles to the Churches, exciting their dull hearts. By
such apparitions did hee set on fire the heart of _Moses_ in the burning
bush; and enflamed _Stephan_, his first Martyr: answerable and
proportionable to which, are our serious contemplations. Behold him as
one that seeth thee, and knoweth thy workes; the rouzing preface of all
these Letters. _Casars_ eye made his souldiers prodigall of their blood.
The Atheist thinks God takes as much notice of him and his prayers, as
hee doth of the humming of Flyes and Bees; and therefore, no marvell if
his service bee formall and fashionable. The faithfull Christian by
faiths prospective sees him at home, and heares him saying, Well done
thou good servant; which maketh him to worke out his heart. Behold him
as the beginning of creatures, especially of the new creature. Oh! what
love hath hee shewed thee in thy redemption? out of what misery, into
what happinesse, by what a price, to what end; but that thou shouldest
bee zealous of good workes? Behold him as the faithfull witnesse, that
witnessed himselfe for thee a good witnesse, and heere faithfully
counsels thee to follow his patterne. Behold him as a speedie and royall
rewarder of his followers. Take thy selfe into paradise, represent to
thy selfe thy crowne, thy throne, thy white robes; looke not on the
things that are seene, but on the farre most excellent wait of glory;
looke upon these, and faint if thou canst. Behold also hee is a
consuming fire, a zealous God, hating lukewarmnesse not onely destroying
_Sodome_ with fire and brimstone, and providing _Tophet_ for his
enemies; but awaking also his drowzie servants, by judgements (as
_Absolon Joab_ by firing his corne) his Israelites by fiery serpents:
whom hee loveth, hee chasteneth, and keepeth them in the fornace of
fiery trialls, till they come to their right temper. Hee standeth and
knocketh: if nothing will arouze us, a time will come, when heaven and
earth shall burne with fire, and Christ shall come in flaming fire, to
render vengeance with fire unquenchable. Wee therefore that know the
terrour of that day, What manner of persons ought we to bee?

From God turne thine eyes unto man: set before thee the pillar, and
clowde of fiery examples, that have led us the way into Canaan. Hee is
but a dull lade that will not follow: The stories of the Scriptures, the
lives of the Fathers, the acts and monuments of the Church, have a
speciall vertue for this effect. The very pictures of the fires, and
Martyrs, cannot but warme thee. If thou canst meete with any living
examples, follow them, as they follow Christ, frequent their company:
even _Saul_ amongst the Prophets, will prophesie. No bangling hawke,
but with a high flyer will mend her pitch: the poorest good companion,
will doe thee some good; when _Silas_ came, _Paul_ burnt in the spirit:
a lesser sticke may fire a billet; If thou findest none, let the
coldnesse of the times heat thee, as frosts doe the fire; Let every
indignation make thee zealous, as the dunstery of the Monkes, made
_Erasmus_ studious: one way to bee rich in times of dearth, is to
engrosse a rare commodity, such as zeale is: now, if ever, _they have
destroyed thy Law_; It is now high time to be zealous.

Consider and emulate the children of this generation, to see how eager
every _Demas_ is for worldly promotion. How did that worthy Bishop
disdaine to see an harlot, more curiously to adorne her body unto sinne
and death, then hee could his soule unto life everlasting. It angred
_Demosthenes_ to see a Smith earlier at his anvile, then he was at his
deske.

When thou hast thus heat thy selfe, take heede of catching colde
againe, as many have done, and brought their zeale to deaths doore.

[Sidenote: Zeales extinguishers.]

This fire may goe out divers wayes: first by subtraction of fewell; if a
man forbeare his accustomed meales, will not his naturall heat decay?
The _Levites_ that kept Gods watch in the Temple, were charged
expressely, morning & evening, if not oftner, to looke to the lights and
the fire. Hee that shall forget (at the least) with the _Curfeau-bell_
in the evening to rake uppe his zeale by prayer, and with the day-bell
in the morning to stirre up & kindle the same, if not oftner with
_Daniel_; I cannot conceive how hee can possibly keepe fire in his
heart. Will God blesse such, as bid him not so much as good-morrow and
good-even?

Hee that shall despise or neglect prophesie, must hee not needes quench
the spirit? have I not marked glorious professors, who for some farme
sake, or other commodities, have flitted from Jerusalem to Jericho;
where the situation was good, but the waters nought; and their zeale
hath perished, because vision hath failed?

Such as reade the Bible by fits upon rainy dayes, not eating the booke
with _John_, but tasting onely with the tippe of the tongue: Such as
meditate by snatches, never chewing the cud and digesting their meat,
they may happily get a smackering, for discourse and table-talke; but
not enough to keepe soule & life together, much lesse for strength and
vigour. Such as forsake the best fellowship, and wax strange to holy
assemblies, (as now the manner of many is) how can they but take colde?
Can one coale alone keepe it selfe glowing?

Though it goe not out for want of matter, yet may it bee put out by
sundry accidents; when it is newly kindled, it may be put out with
scoffes and reproaches, if _Peter_ take not heede, and fence himselfe
well against them; but if once throughly growne, such breath will but
spred and encrease it.

It is possible fire may bee oppressed with too much wood, and heat
suffocated with too much nourishment: over-much prayer, reading, and
study, may bee a wearinesse both to flesh and spirit: but it so rarely
happeneth, that I neede not mention it; and yet the soule hath its
satiety. There be some such perchance over-nice men in this sense also,
who have not learned that God will have them mercifull to themselves: It
is often smoothered for want of vent and exercise. Let such as use not
and expresse not their zeale, bragge of their good hearts; surely they
have none such, or not like to have them such. If _Nicodemus_ had not
buried Christ by day, we might have feared his zeale had gone out, for
all his comming by night.

Yet this is not so ordinary, as to extinguish it by the quench-coale of
sinne; grosse sinne every man knowes will waste the conscience, and make
shipwracke of zeale: but I say, the least known evill unrepented of, is
as a theefe in the candle, or an obstruction in the liver. I feare,
_David_ served God but reasonably, till hee published his repentance;
hee that steales his meat, though poverty tempt him, yet giveth thankes
but coldly: zeale and sinne, will soone expell the one or the other out
of their subject; Can you imagine in the same roofe, God and Beliall,
the Arke and Dagon? Lastly, and most commonly, forraine heat will
extract the inward, and adventicious heat consume the naturall.

The Sunne will put out the fire; and so will the love of the world, the
love of the Father, they cannot stand together in intense degrees, one
cannot serve both these matters with such affection as both would have.
Seldome seest thou a man make haste to bee rich, and thrive in religion.
Christs message to _John_ holds true; The poore are most forward in
receiving and following the Gospell: as thou lovest thy zeale, beware of
resolving to bee rich, lest gain proove thy godlinesse; take heede of
ambitious aspiring, lest Courts and great places, proove ill aires for
zeale, whither it is as easie to go zealous, as to returne wise:
_Peter_ whiles hee warmed his hands, cooled his heart; Not that
greatnesse and zeale cannot agree; but for that our weaknes many times
severs them. If thou beest willing to die poore in estate, thou mayest
the more easily live rich in grace. _Smyrna_, the poorest of the seven
Candle-stickes, hath the richest price upon it.

The diligent practise of these courses will make easie the practise of
this counsell, _Be zealous, &c_.


_The fift part._

[Sidenote: 1 Object.]

But heere mee thinke I heare the lukewarme worldling of our times, fume
& chafe, and aske what needs all this adoe for zeale, as if all Gods
people were not zealous enough.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Such as thinke they are, or can bee zealous enough, neede no other
conviction to bee poore, blinde, naked, wretched and pittifull
_Laodiceans_: Fire is ever climbing and aspiring higher; zeale is ever
aiming at that which is before; carried towards perfection; thinking
meanely of that which is past, and already attained, condemning his
unprofitable service, as _Calvin_ his last Will: this rule tries full
conceited Christians.

[Sidenote: 2 Object.]

What would you have us doe? wee professe, keepe our Church, heare
Sermons, as Christians ought to doe.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Affectionate friendship and service is not onely for publique shew and
pomp, upon festivall dayes, in Chambers of Presence; but for
domesticall, ordinary, and private use; to such holy-day and Church
retainers, God may well say, Let us have some of this zeale at home and
apart.

All affections are most passionate, without a witnesse. Such as whose
families, closets, fields, beds, walkes, doe testifie of their worship,
as well as temples & Synagogues, are right servitors: God much respects
their devotions; and they have strong proofe of the power of godlinesse.

[Sidenote: 3 Object.]

Wee would you should know, that wee are such as have prayer sayd or read
in our families and housholds; or else we say some to our selves at our
lying downe, and uprising and more then that, say you what you will, wee
holde more then needs.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

First, know that zeale knowes no such unmannerly courses, as to slubber
over a few prayers, whiles you are dressing and undressing your selves,
as most doe, halfe asleepe, halfe awake; know further, that such as hold
onely a certaine stint of daily duties, as malt-horses their pace, or
mill-horses their round, out of custome or forme, are far from that
mettle which is ever putting forward, growing from strength to strength,
and instant in duties, in season, out of season: and this sayes hard to
lazy Christians.

[Sidenote: 4 Object.]

May not wee goe too far on the right hand?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

It is true: but liberality baulkes, and feares covetousnesse and
niggardize, more a great deale then prodigallity; so does zeale
lukewarmnes and coldnesse, more then too much heate and forwardnesse;
the defect is more opposite and dangerous to some vertues, then the
excesse.

[Sidenote: 5 Object.]

Why? are not some thinke you, too straight laced, that dare not use
their Christian liberty in some recreations? sware by small oathes, or
lend money for reasonable use? hath not God left many things
indifferent, wherein some shew themselves more nice then wise?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Zeale will cut of the right hand, if it cause to offend; much more to
pare the nayles and superfluities: it consumes the strongest, dearest
corruptions; much more will it singe off such haire and drosse as these:
If ought be praise worthy, it imbraceth such things; if any be
doubtfull, carrying shew of evill, of ill reporte, it dares not meddle
with them; it feares that some of these are as indifferent, as
fornication was among the heathen.

[Sidenote: 6 Object.]

There are but few such, no not of the better sort, as you speake of.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Graunt there bee any, and zealous emulation culleth the highest
examples. Such as meane to excell in any Art, travell to find out the
rarest workemen, purchase the choysest Copies; hee that hath true zeale,
will strive to purge himselfe, as Christ is pure.

[Sidenote: 7 Object.]

Will you have us runne before our neighbours, or live without example or
company?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Cowards and cravens, stand and look who goes first: souldiers of courage
will cast lots for the onset and fore-rank, for desperat services, and
single combats. Lades will not go without the way be led.

[Sidenote: 8 Object.]

So we may soone come to trouble, and danger enough.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

What daunger can there bee, of an honest, peaceable, religious
forwardnesse?

The slug or snaile, puts out the tender horne to feele for lets in the
way, and puls them in where there is no cause; so doe the fearfull that
shall be without: but zeale either findes no dangers, or makes them
none; it neither feares to doe well, or to reproove ill doers, let who
so will be displeased.

Some indeed care not whome they offend, they are so harsh and fiery,
they can beare with nothing.

[Sidenote: 9 Object.]

Will true Christianity allow us to beare with any sinne?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Can tinne, or hot iron choose but hisse againe, if cold water be cast on
it? can a righteous soul choose but vexe it selfe at open evill? Such
Ostriches as can digest oathes, prophane and filthie speeches, shew what
mettle they have for the Lord of hosts; who yet will be ready enough to
offer the challenge, or stab, for the least disgrace to themselves, or
their mistresse: _Phineas_ had rather, if it were lawfull, fight in Gods
quarrels then his owne.

[Sidenote: 10 Object.]

All are not by nature of so hot dispositions, or so fiery-spirited, as
others.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

If there bee such a dull flegmaticke creature as hath no life nor
spirite in any thing hee goes about, or whome nothing will moove; hee
may plead complexion, and yet grace is above nature: but the best way
is; See every man compare his devotion in matters of God, with his
spirits and mettle in other affayres, wherein his element or delight
lies; if the one equall not the other, the fault is not in nature: the
oldest man hath memory enough for his gold, and the coldest constitution
heate enough where it likes.

[Sidenote: 11 Object.]

Well, our harts may bee as good as the best though we cannot shew it.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Fire cannot be long smothered, it will either finde a vent, or goe out;
zeale will either finde word, or deede, to expresse it selfe withall.

[Sidenote: 12 Object.]

All have not the gift of utterance.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Violent affections have made the dumbe to finde a tongue; If it be lowe
water the mille may stand; but aboundance of heart will set the wheeles
on going What earnest discourses will unlearned Mariners make of their
voiages? Huntsmen of their game, &c.

[Sidenote: 13 Object.]

All have not ability and meanes: many have great charges.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Love and zeale are munificent, make money their servant, not their
master: wheresoever the heart is enlarged, the hand cannot bee
straightned; where the bowells are open, the purse is not shut. _Herod_
for his pleasure, cares not for halfe his kingdome; what will not some
Gentle-men give for hawks and hounds? not onely the poore woman that
spent the rich oyntment on Christ, the widow that gave all her
substance, the converts that solde all, and threw all at the feet of the
Apostles, but even the bounty of the superstitious Papists shall rise in
judgement against such as professe a religion, wil give it good words &
countenance; but bee at no cost with it, and know a cheaper way to save
charge withall.

[Sidenote: 14 Object.]

All have not so much leisure to spend, so much time and study, about
matters of religion, they have somewhat else to doe.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

There are indeede many vanities, which distract and divide the minde of
worldlings; but zeale counts one thing needefull, to which it makes all
other veile and stand by. Is there any so good an husband of his time,
that will not steale some houre for his pleasure; that cannot spare his
God and his soule halfe an houre, morning and evening; that bestowes not
idly, as much time as a Sermon or two would take upp in the weeke? The
soule I confesse hath his satiety, as well as the body; but why should
we sit on thornes, more at a Sermon then at a Play; thinke the Saboths
longer then holi-daies; but for want of zeale? If thou beest not a vaine
and willing deceiver of thy selfe, and others; deale honestly & plainly
with thy soule, try thy selfe by these few rules; and if thou judgest
thy selfe to come short of them, amend and _be Zealous_.


_The sixt part._

Which little round fire-ball comming to hand, as _Davids_ small stone,
by ordinary lot, knowing the insufficiency of mine owne; I pray that God
with his arme would scatter it farre and wide into those wilde parts of
the world without the pale of Christendome, which lie so frozen and
benummed in their Paganisme, that they feele not the coldnesse of their
religions; as also in those regions that being within the Tropickes of
the Church, have just so much, and so little heat, as to thinke they
have enough, and neede no more: Cheefly mine affections burne within mee
for the good of mine owne Nation, for which I would I had but so much
zeale as truely to wish my selfe _Anathema_, upon condition it had heat
sutable to the light. For I must beare it record, it hath knowledge, I
would I could say, according to zeale. But the spirit, knowing that
which is spoken to all to bee in effect as spoken to none, directs mee
what I should speake to Churches, to speake to particular Angels. Now
the principall in our Church, under that Archangell of the covenant, I
most willingly acknowledge to bee my Lord the King, as an Angell of
light. And why not that very Angell, who by his writing hath begunne to
powre out the fift viall upon the throne of the beast, darkned his
Kingdome, caused them to gnaw their tongues for greefe, and blaspheme
for the smart of their wounds; though as yet they will not repent of
their errours? The Lord annoynt him more and more with this oyle above
all the Princes of the earth, that from his head, it may runne downe
upon our skirts; make him shine in zeale above all other starres, to the
warming & enlightning of this whole Horizon; set him up as a standard
for his people; cloath him with zeale, as with a cloake, to recompence
the fury of the adversaries, that he may strike the Aramites, not three
but five times till they be consumed; that he may put the Ammonites
under the yron sawes, harrowes, axes, which have provoked him as much,
as ever they did _David_, 2. Sam. 12. But yet as in the time of the old
Testament the custody of the fire and light was the charge of the
Priest; so here I observe Christ to lay it upon his Ministers,
interpreting his rule by his practise, _Tell the church, Tell the Angell
of the Church_; honouring that despised office, with that stately stile;
intimating the union betwene People and Minister, that they should bee
as one: what is spoken to the one, is spoken to the other; not as some,
that ever make Clergy and Layty two members, in division and opposition;
neither yet as some spirites that lay all level, but implying a
property, especially in grace and zeale in the Ministers, whom the
Preacher calls the master of the assemblies; that they should exceede as
farre the people, as Angels doe men, and that he will reckon with them
for the religion of the people, because colde Priests make bolde
sinners; zealous _Jehoiada_ may mak _Jehoash_ the King zealous, so long
as hee lives with him. Wee therefore men and brethren, or rather men
and Angels, upon whom it lies to keepe life and heat in the devotion of
the world, to consume the drosse of vices and heresies, that have fallen
into the sinke of our times; wee that are to make ready our people for
the second comming of Christ, is the spirit of _Ely_ thinke wee
sufficient for us? What manner of persons ought we to bee, burning in
spirit, fervent in prayer, thundring in preaching, shining in life and
conversation? Why is it then my brethren (oh let my plainest rebukes bee
the fruits and signes of my best love to mine owne Tribe; let them not
bee as breakings of the head, but as precious balme to those whose
honour with the people, I preferre to my life) why is it that some of us
pray so rarely and so coldly in private (the evills of our times will
not out but by frequent fasting and fervent prayer) in publique so
briefly, so perfunctorily, and feebly, that wee scarce have any
witnesses of what wee say? Why are there yet remaining any Mutes
amongst us? Why are ther any tounges that dare speake against often or
zealous preaching? Doth not _Paul_ adjure us before him that shall judge
the elect Angels, that we preach instantly, in season, and out of
season? Reade wee the commentaries of that text, or let the practise of
Ancients expound it; and tell mee if ever old or new interpreted that
charge, of bare reading, of quarterly, or monethly, yea, or of once on
the Sabbath preaching onely, as if that were fully sufficient, without
endeavoring or desiring any more. If alwaies often preaching bee
prating, what meant the practise I say, not onely of _Calvin_, and
_Beza_ but of _Chrysostome_, _Basil_, _Ambrose_ with other of the
Fathers, preaching every day in the weeke, some of them twise in the
weeke, none of them so seldome, as such would bear the world in hand.
What meant sundry ancient Councells, (the eleventh of _Tolet_ in Spaine)
yea even of Trent it selfe, to excite the torpor of the Bishoppes of
their times, as their Canons speake, enjoyning frequent preaching,
calling for more then almost any man is able to performe?

But heere I may turne reprooving into rejoycing, that preaching is
growne in any better fashion and grace with our times, by royall and
reverend, both examples and countenance: only I wish that every
_Archippus_ may fulfill his Ministery, be instant and constant in
preaching. _Salomon_ the older, and wiser hee grew, the more hee taught
the people, sharpened his goads, and fastned his nails; whereas many
amongst us are so wise in their youth, as to affect the foolishnes of
preaching; but in their dotage, Ease slayes the foole; when the doore is
oyled, it leaves creaking; they must then fall to make much of
themselves, till contrary with the Prophet they cry out, My fatnesse, my
fatnesse, my belly, my belly; so favouring their lungs, that they will
bee sure never to die of _Davids_ consumption of zeale; let such preach,
say they, that want livings: and if for shame they preach at all, it
must bee rarely and easily, for breaking of their winde (my meaning is
not to tax such, whom God disinables by weaknesse of body; or such as
recompence their rarity with industry, as _Perkins_, &c.) and yet
forsooth these thinke they may justly challenge, and weare the double
honor of countenance and maintenance; I marvell with what right, or with
what face, so long as there remaineth expresse Canon of Scripture,
bequeathing it to those, that toyle in word and doctrine. Neither will
zeale set us on worke onely to preach, or to preach often to avoyd the
infamy of bare readers; but it will teach us to preach painefully, and
that in the evidence and demonstration, not so much of art, or nature,
as of the spirit and grace; regarding onely, that the people know Christ
and him crucified; not caring whether they know what wee have read, how
many quotations our memory will carry levell, how roundly wee can utter
our minde in new minted words, in like sounding, idle, vaine, and
offensive _Paranomasies_; I blush to fall into the least touch of that
kinde: yet at once to shew and reproove that childish folly, It is a
vaine of vaine preaching, turning sound preaching into a sound of
preaching, tickling mens eares, like a tinckling cymball, feeding them,
[Greek: hêdusmati kai ouk edesmasi], spoyling the plaine song, with
descant and division: what is this but to shew our owne levitie and want
of true Art; indeede affecting such a dancing, piperly and effeminate
eloquence (as _Tully, Demosthenes_, or any Masculine Oratour would
scorne) in steade of that divine powerfull deliverie, which becommeth
him, that speakes the Oracles of God. If ever wee meane to doe any good,
wee must exhort and reproove, with all vehemency and authority; lifting
upp our voyce as a trumpet, as the sonnes of thunder; pearcing their
eares, witnessing, striving and contending, according to our gift
whatsoever it bee, to manifest our affections, that wee may worke upon
the people; which all the Art in the world will not teach us to doe:
onely zeale at the heart will naturally produce it, without straining or
affecting. If God require the heart as well as the head; why should wee
not labour to moove the affections, as well as enforme the judgement;
There is a doctrinall, and as some tearme it, a Doctorly kinde of
preaching, which is admired of some that understand it not; of others
that could be content with the Masse againe, because it was gentle, and
had no teeth in it. And such Sermons I have sometimes heard, for matter
voyd of exception, but so delivered, as if one were acting a part, or
saying a lesson by heart. It hath called to minde a song which sometimes
I have met withall, excellently composed, full of sweet ayre, surely and
truely sung; but with flat and dead voyces without spirit, which hath
marred the musique: Of such a Sermon and Preacher, the Countreymans
verdict did well, that said, this man may bee a great scholler, but hee
wants beetle and wedges to heaw our knotted timber withall, our greene
wood will not burn unlesse it be better blown; you shall sometimes see
an excellent horse of shape and colour, having many of those markes _Du
Bartes_ describes in _Caines_ supposed horse; which yet wanting mettle
hath beene of little worth, and lesse use. If there were no other
Preachers then these, which hold themselves the onely profound and
learned Preachers, I muse what should become of conversion of soules,
which they that covet; must come with the spirit of _Elias_, to turne
the hearts of the fathers to their children, I may in truth, and I hope
with modesty speake with the Preacher, that in observing I have
observed, and have found, that divers great Clarkes have had but little
fruit of their ministery; but hardly any truely zealous man of God
(though of lesser gifts) but have had much comfort of their labours, in
their owne and bordering parishes, being in this likened by _Gregorie_,
to the yron on the Smiths anvile sparkling round about. And if for this
any bordering neighbours, whose cold labours worke not the like
successe, shall accuse them of some kinde (I know not what) of policie
in bewitching the people; they may well reply, Behold our zealous
affections are our charmes, and zeale all our witchcraft, as _Latimer_
well answered one that accused the people of partiality, for not
affecting him that preached one of his printed Sermons, that hee had
indeede his Sticke, but wanted his Rosen; meaning his zealous manner of
preaching and living, without which last, all the former will doe but
little good, if a good ensample of life accompany not their doctrine, as
lightning doth thunder. For there are some (I speake with sorrow of
heart) that seeme to have fire in their preaching, but carry water in
their life; being notoriously proud, covetous, or debauched, stained
with odious vices. Let us heare the summ of all. Doe wee love Christ
more then ordinary? would wee give proofe of our trebble love to him?
Let us then feede his flocke with a trebble zeale, expressed in our
prayer, preaching and living: Let us make it appeare to the consciences
of all, that the top of our ambition is Gods glory: and that wee preferr
the winning of soules, to the winning of the world.

This title of Angels why may it not also be extended to Magistrates, as
well as that higher stile, of Gods; Sure I am, that the scarlet robe of
zeale would exceeding well become them. _Jethro_ maketh it their prime
and essentiall character; God and _Moses_, their onely and sole, in the
charge and commission to _Jehoshuah_ so oft repeated; _Onely be of good
courage_. And if _David_ were now to re-pen his Psalme; I thinke hee
might alter the forme of his counsell, and say, _Bee zealous yee Rulers
and Judges of the world_, and not wise and politique: or rather under
the tearmes of wisdome, hee comprehends indeede the zeale wee call for,
the most now adayes being _Gallio's_, wise onely for the matters of the
Commonwealth; not having a sparke of that spirit which was in _Phineas,
Daniel_, and _Nehemias_, &c. for the Lord of hosts, or to his Lawes and
Commandements; as if God had made Magistrates keepers onely of the
second Table, governours of men, and not of Christians; guardians onely
of civill societies, and not of his Church, and shepheards also of his
flocke. Are Idolatries, blasphemies, prophaning of Saboths, no sinns?
Why then either have not the lawes force and strength enough in them (as
sometime wee are answered when wee complaine) or why are they not
executed for the suppressing of these raging sins? are not all they
punished with death in the Scriptures, as well as breaches of the second
table? Blood I leave to the malignant Church, and admire clemency in
Rulers, as much as any; but yet I know the prophane dissolutenesse of
the times, requires a three stringed whipp of severity to purge our
_Augean_ stable of the soule abuses, whipt often with penns and
tongues, but spared by them that beare the sword (a man may say of many
Governours) altogether in vaine for matters of religion. Are not kings
of the earth charg'd to render double to the bloody strumpet of Rome?
Why then doth the hurtfull pitty of our times imbolden and increase
their numbers? _Laodicea_ it selfe, I doubt not, for matters of mine and
thine, had (as their name imports) good civill justice and justicers;
but what was God the neerer for it? doth hee not threaten for all that
to spue them out of his mouth? shall hee not curse those that doe his
worke negligently, fearfully & partially? Our times complaine of two
speciall canker wormes of justice, which eat up zeale in Magistrates.
The first is _Covetousnesse_, which makes men of place to transgresse
for a morsell of bread; the zeale of their owne houses consumes the
zeale of Gods house: The building of great houses, keeping of great
houses, and matching with great houses, raising and leaving of great
houses behinde them, makes them so ravenous, that they devoure so much,
as choakes all their zeale; which would teach them to shake their laps
of bribes, and scorne to accept gifts, though men would augment them for
the perverting of judgement. The other is _Cowardice_ and _Fearfulnes_:
which how unfit, and base a quality did _Nehemiah_ thinke it for a man
of his place? no better then shynesse in a fore-horse, whose eyes men
fence on both sides, that they may lead the way, and goe without
starting; unto which, zeale is answerable in Magistrates, causing them
onely to see him that is invisible, without casting a squint eye at men;
to sing to God onely of judgement and mercy, without tuning their songs
to mans eare; to walke in the perfect way, without turning, either to
the right or left hand for feare of favour. Oh that there were such an
heart in our leaders; how easily would our people follow! what a spring
tide of zeale should wee have, if the Sunne and Moone would cast out a
benigne aspect upon them! Doth it not flourish in all those shires and
townes, where the Word and Sword doe joyntly cherish it? In others which
are the greatest number, how doth it languish and wane away, and hang
downe the head? where is it in diverse places of the land to bee seene?
I had almost sayd in my haste and heat, there is none that hath zeale,
no not one, there is no courage for the truth; but that I remember that
_Eliah_ was checked for over-shooting himselfe in his too short and
quicke computation. I hope the Lord hath his fifties amongst us, though
but thinn sowne in comparison of the swarmes of professed Recusants, and
Church-Papists, of prophane Atheists, key-cold worldlings, and lukewarme
professors. The bodies of our many severall Congregations, yea even of
the better sort, whereunto have they beene likened by our separated
adversaries; but unto the Prophet _Hosea_ his cake, halfe baked upon the
hearth, having one side, that is, the one side to the world-ward, in
publique service, scorched a little and browned over; but the inside to
God-ward, in private, and family-duties, no better then dough; many of
them making indeede some shew, as the out-landish fruits that are
plashed upon our walls, but wanting heat never come to maturity. If wee
should make good their resemblances, how then should wee please the
stomacke of God? who hath indeede brooked and borne us a long time, I
doubt but wamblingly. How neare were wee going in 88. and in the powder
treason? Doe we thinke he will ever digest us, in the temper wee are in?
which (to confesse the truth of the fashionable Christian) what is it
but a state of neutrality, indifferency, or such a mediocrity, as will
just serve the time, satisfie Law, or stand with reputation of
neighbours? beyond which, if any step a little forward, do not the rest
hunt upon the stop? If there hap to breake out a sparkle of zeale in any
one house in a parish; is not the whole towne in an uprore, as when the
bells ring awke every man brings his bucket, to the quenching of this
fire? If hell bee in an Ale-house, who cryes out of it? & as for our
Sundayes Church-service, which is all that God gets at our hands; how
perfunctorily, and fashionably is it slubbered over; how are his Saboths
made the voyder and dung-hill for all refuse businesse, divided betweene
the Church and the Ale-house, the May-pole commonly beguiling the
Pulpit? What man would not spue to see God thus worshipped? This want of
devotion makes the foule mouthed Papists to spet at us: this want of
reformation, makes the queasie-stomacked Brownists cast themselves out
of the Church; and shall God alwayes suffer the land to beare us? But
behold, he stands at the door & knocks, by treasons, by plagues, by the
hammer of dearths, discontents, fires, inundations, especially by the
word; his locks are wet with waiting. Oh before hee shake off the dust
of his feet against us, and turne to some other nation more worthy, let
us open the doore, that hee may come in and sup with us; if hee love us,
hee will purge us, and scoure us, by one chastizement or other: if hee
have no pleasure in us, hee cannot but unburthen his stomacke of us; If
all the land besides should turne the deafe eare, yet let mee entreat
and charge you of my flock to heare his voyce, & be zealous. Since my
comming amongst you, I have handled some bookes of the olde Testament,
the Epistles to the Romanes, to the Hebrewes, of Saint _James_, _Peter_
and _John_, out of them taught the doctrine of the Law, of Faith, Love
and good Workes: now in the choyce of this Epistle of Christ to
_Laodicea_, my desire was to boyle up the former to their just temper:
in which worke I can willingly bee content to spend my strength, and
dayes, if God see it fit. I cannot be a better sacrifice then to God,
and for you, if I waste my selfe, so you may have light & heat; what
else is the end of my life? God hath given you a name, your zeale is
gone abroad, & I hope you have many names among you; the Lord encrease
their number and zeale. If but one of us this day, shall open this
doore of his heart with _Jehoshuah_, let others chuse, I and my house
will serve the Lord more zealously then heeretofore; neither I nor hee
shall have lost our labours. A lively picture casts the eye upon every
one that comes neere it: such is the word with whom, and with which we
have to do; Let him that is now colde, grow colder & colder; but let him
that hath an eare, heare what hath beene sayd to the Churches; and be
zealous and amend.

The Lord give us not onely understanding, but zeale in all things: he
baptize us with fire: hee breath on us, and inspire into us the spirit
of life & power, &c. So shall wee runn the wayes of his commandements.


FINIS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Coal From The Altar, To Kindle The
Holy Fire of Zeale, by Samuel Ward

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COAL FROM THE ALTAR, TO ***

***** This file should be named 16423-8.txt or 16423-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/4/2/16423/

Produced by Jordan Dohms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
